Rumi - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Languages Language links are at the top of the page. Search Search Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1Name 2Life Toggle Life subsection 2.1Overview 2.2Childhood and emigration 2.3Education and encounters with Shams-e Tabrizi 2.4Later life and death 3Teachings 4Major works Toggle Major works subsection 4.1Poetic works 4.2Prose works 5Religious outlook 6Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 6.1Universality 6.2Iranian world 6.3Mewlewī Sufi Order; Rumi and Turkey 6.4Religious denomination 6.5Eight hundredth anniversary celebrations 6.6Mawlana Rumi Review 7See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1General 7.2Poems by Rumi 7.3On Persian culture 7.4Rumi scholars and writers 7.5English translators of Rumi poetry 8References 9Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1English translations 9.2Life and work 9.3Persian literature 10External links Toggle the table of contents Rumi 101 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული कॉशुर / کٲشُر Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sufi scholar and poet (1207–1273) For other uses, see Rumi (disambiguation). Mawlānā, Mevlânâ Rumi رُومی Rumi as depicted by Iranian artist Hossein Behzad (1957) Title Jalaluddin, jalāl al-Din,[1] Mevlana, Mawlana Personal Born 30 September 1207 Wakhsh (present-day Tajikistan),[2][3] Khwarezmian Empire Died 17 December 1273 (aged 66) Konya (present-day Turkey), Sultanate of Rum Resting place Tomb of Mevlana Rumi, Mevlana Museum, Konya, Turkey Religion Islam Nationality Khwarezmian Empire, then Sultanate of Rum Home town Wakhsh (present-day Tajikistan) or Balkh present-day Afghanistan Spouse Gevher Khatun, Karra Khatun Children Sultan Valad, Ala al-din Chelebi, Amir Alim Chelebi, Malike Khatun. Parents Baha al-Din Valad (father) Mo'mena Khatun (mother) Era Islamic Golden Age (7th Islamic century) Denomination Sunni[4] Jurisprudence Hanafi Creed Maturidi[5][6] Main interest(s) Sufi poetry, Hanafi jurisprudence, Maturidi theology Notable idea(s) Sufi whirling, Muraqaba Notable work(s) Mathnawī-ī ma'nawī, Dīwān-ī Shams-ī Tabrīzī, Fīhi mā fīhi Tariqa Mevlevi Known for Mathnawi, Rumi Music Pen name Rumi Order Sufi Philosophy Sufism, Mysticism Muslim leader Predecessor Shams-i Tabrizi and Baha-ud-din Zakariya Successor Husam al-Din Chalabi, Sultan Valad Influenced by Muhammad, Abu Hanifa, al-Maturidi, Al-Ghazali, Muhaqqeq Termezi, Baha-ud-din Zakariya, Attār, Sanā'ī, Abu Sa'īd Abulḫayr, Ḫaraqānī, Bayazīd Bistāmī, Sultan Walad, Shams Tabrizi, Lal Shahbaz Qalandar, Ibn Arabi, Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Influenced Jami, Shah Abdul Latif Bhittai, Kazi Nazrul Islam, Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob, Abdolkarim Soroush, Hossein Elahi Ghomshei, Muhammad Iqbal, Hossein Nasr[7] Yunus Emre, Eva de Vitray-Meyerovitch, Annemarie Schimmel Arabic name Personal (Ism) Muḥammad محمد Patronymic (Nasab) ibn Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥusayn ibn Aḥmad بن محمد بن الحسين بن أحمد Epithet (Laqab) Jalāl ad-Dīn جلال الدين Toponymic (Nisba) ar-Rūmī الرومي al-Khaṭībī الخطيبي al-Balkhī البلخي al-Bakrī البكري This article contains Persian text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols. Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad Rūmī (Persian: جلال‌الدین مُحمّد رُومی), or simply Rumi (30 September 1207 – 17 December 1273), was a 13th-century poet, Hanafi faqih, Islamic scholar, Maturidi theologian and Sufi mystic originally from Greater Khorasan in Greater Iran.[8][9] Rumi's works were written mostly in Persian, but occasionally he also used Turkish,[10] Arabic[11] and Greek[12][13][14] in his verse. His Masnavi (Mathnawi), composed in Konya, is considered one of the greatest poems of the Persian language.[15][16] Rumi's influence has transcended national borders and ethnic divisions: Iranians, Kurds, Pashtuns, Tajiks, Turks, Greeks, Central Asian Muslims, as well as Muslims of South Asia have greatly appreciated his spiritual legacy for the past seven centuries.[17][18] His poetry influenced not only Persian literature, but also the literary traditions of the Ottoman Turkish, Chagatai, Pashto, Kurdish, Urdu, and Bengali languages.[17][19][20] Rumi's works are widely read today in their original language across Greater Iran and the Persian-speaking world.[21][22] His poems have subsequently been translated into many of the world's languages and transposed into various formats. Rumi has been described as the "most popular poet",[23] is very popular in Turkey, Azerbaijan and South Asia,[24] and has become the "best selling poet" in the United States.[25][26] Name He is most commonly called Rumi in English. His full name is given by his contemporary Sipahsalar as Muhammad bin Muhammad bin al-Husayn al-Khatibi al-Balkhi al-Bakri (Arabic: محمد بن محمد بن الحسين الخطيبي البلخي البكري).[27] He is more commonly known as Molānā Jalāl ad-Dīn Muḥammad Rūmī (مولانا جلال‌الدین محمد رومی). Jalal ad-Din is an Arabic name meaning "Glory of the Faith". Balkhī and Rūmī are his nisbas, meaning, respectively, "from Balkh" and "from Rûm" ('Roman,' what European history now calls Byzantine Anatolia[28]). According to the authoritative Rumi biographer Franklin Lewis of the University of Chicago, "[t]he Anatolian peninsula which had belonged to the Byzantine, or eastern Roman empire, had only relatively recently been conquered by Muslims and even when it came to be controlled by Turkish Muslim rulers, it was still known to Arabs, Persians and Turks as the geographical area of Rum. As such, there are a number of historical personages born in or associated with Anatolia known as Rumi, a word borrowed from Arabic literally meaning 'Roman,' in which context Roman refers to subjects of the Byzantine Empire or simply to people living in or things associated with Anatolia."[29] He was also known as "Mullah of Rum" (ملای روم mullā-yi Rūm or ملای رومی mullā-yi Rūmī).[30] Rumi is widely known by the sobriquet Mawlānā/Molānā[1][31] (Persian: مولانا Persian pronunciation: [moulɒːnɒ]) in Iran and popularly known as Mevlânâ in Turkey. Mawlānā (مولانا) is a term of Arabic origin, meaning "our master". The term مولوی Mawlawī/Mowlavi (Persian) and Mevlevi (Turkish), also of Arabic origin, meaning "my master", is also frequently used for him.[32] Life Jalal ad-Din Rumi gathers Sufi mystics Overview Rumi was born to Persian parents,[33][10][11][34] in Balkh,[35] modern-day Afghanistan or Wakhsh,[3] a village on the East bank of the Wakhsh River known as Sangtuda in present-day Tajikistan.[3] The area, culturally adjacent to Balkh, is where Mawlânâ's father, Bahâ' uddîn Walad, was a preacher and jurist.[3] He lived and worked there until 1212, when Rumi was aged around five and the family moved to Samarkand.[3] Greater Balkh was at that time a major centre of Persian culture[16][34][36] and Sufism had developed there for several centuries. The most important influences upon Rumi, besides his father, were the Persian poets Attar and Sanai.[37] Rumi expresses his appreciation: "Attar was the spirit, Sanai his eyes twain, And in time thereafter, Came we in their train"[38] and mentions in another poem: "Attar has traversed the seven cities of Love, We are still at the turn of one street".[39] His father was also connected to the spiritual lineage of Najm al-Din Kubra.[18] Rumi lived most of his life under the Persianate[40][41][42] Seljuk Sultanate of Rum, where he produced his works[43] and died in 1273 AD. He was buried in Konya, and his shrine became a place of pilgrimage.[44] Upon his death, his followers and his son Sultan Walad founded the Mevlevi Order, also known as the Order of the Whirling Dervishes, famous for the Sufi dance known as the Sama ceremony. He was laid to rest beside his father, and over his remains a shrine was erected. A hagiographical account of him is described in Shams ud-Din Ahmad Aflāki's Manāqib ul-Ārifīn (written between 1318 and 1353). This biography needs to be treated with care as it contains both legends and facts about Rumi.[45] For example, Professor Franklin Lewis of the University of Chicago, author of the most complete biography on Rumi, has separate sections for the hagiographical biography of Rumi and the actual biography about him.[46] Childhood and emigration Rumi's father was Bahā ud-Dīn Walad, a theologian, jurist and a mystic from Wakhsh,[3] who was also known by the followers of Rumi as Sultan al-Ulama or "Sultan of the Scholars". According to Sultan Walad's Ibadetname and Shamsuddin Aflaki (c.1286 to 1291), Rumi was a descendant of Abu Bakr.[47] Some modern scholars, however, reject this claim and state it does not hold on closer examination. The claim of maternal descent from the Khwarazmshah for Rumi or his father is also seen as a non-historical hagiographical tradition designed to connect the family with royalty, but this claim is rejected for chronological and historical reasons. The most complete genealogy offered for the family stretches back to six or seven generations to famous Hanafi jurists.[46][48][49] We do not learn the name of Baha al-Din's mother in the sources, only that he referred to her as "Māmi" (colloquial Persian for Māma),[50] and that she was a simple woman who lived to the 1200s. The mother of Rumi was Mu'mina Khātūn. The profession of the family for several generations was that of Islamic preachers of the relatively liberal Hanafi Maturidi school, and this family tradition was continued by Rumi (see his Fihi Ma Fih and Seven Sermons) and Sultan Walad (see Ma'rif Waladi for examples of his everyday sermons and lectures). When the Mongols invaded Central Asia sometime between 1215 and 1220, Baha ud-Din Walad, with his whole family and a group of disciples, set out westwards. According to hagiographical account which is not agreed upon by all Rumi scholars, Rumi encountered one of the most famous mystic Persian poets, Attar, in the Iranian city of Nishapur, located in the province of Khorāsān. Attar immediately recognized Rumi's spiritual eminence. He saw the father walking ahead of the son and said, "Here comes a sea followed by an ocean."[51][52] Attar gave the boy his Asrārnāma, a book about the entanglement of the soul in the material world. This meeting had a deep impact on the eighteen-year-old Rumi and later on became the inspiration for his works. From Nishapur, Walad and his entourage set out for Baghdad, meeting many of the scholars and Sufis of the city.[citation needed] From Baghdad they went to Hejaz and performed the pilgrimage at Mecca. The migrating caravan then passed through Damascus, Malatya, Erzincan, Sivas, Kayseri and Nigde. They finally settled in Karaman for seven years; Rumi's mother and brother both died there. In 1225, Rumi married Gowhar Khatun in Karaman. They had two sons: Sultan Walad and Ala-eddin Chalabi. When his wife died, Rumi married again and had a son, Amir Alim Chalabi, and a daughter, Malakeh Khatun. On 1 May 1228, most likely as a result of the insistent invitation of 'Alā' ud-Dīn Key-Qobād, ruler of Anatolia, Baha' ud-Din came and finally settled in Konya in Anatolia within the westernmost territories of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm. Education and encounters with Shams-e Tabrizi A page of a copy c. 1503 of the Diwan-e Shams-e Tabriz-i. See Rumi ghazal 163. Baha' ud-Din became the head of a madrassa (religious school) and when he died, Rumi, aged twenty-five, inherited his position as the Islamic molvi. One of Baha' ud-Din's students, Sayyed Burhan ud-Din Muhaqqiq Termazi, continued to train Rumi in the Shariah as well as the Tariqa, especially that of Rumi's father. For nine years, Rumi practised Sufism as a disciple of Burhan ud-Din until the latter died in 1240 or 1241. Rumi's public life then began: he became an Islamic Jurist, issuing fatwas and giving sermons in the mosques of Konya. He also served as a Molvi (Islamic teacher) and taught his adherents in the madrassa. During this period, Rumi also travelled to Damascus and is said to have spent four years there. It was his meeting with the dervish Shams-e Tabrizi on 15 November 1244 that completely changed his life. From an accomplished teacher and jurist, Rumi was transformed into an ascetic. Shams had travelled throughout the Middle East searching and praying for someone who could "endure my company". A voice said to him, "What will you give in return?" Shams replied, "My head!" The voice then said, "The one you seek is Jalal ud-Din of Konya." On the night of 5 December 1248, as Rumi and Shams were talking, Shams was called to the back door. He went out, never to be seen again. It is rumoured that Shams was murdered with the connivance of Rumi's son, 'Ala' ud-Din; if so, Shams indeed gave his head for the privilege of mystical friendship.[53] Rumi's love for, and his bereavement at the death of, Shams found their expression in an outpouring of lyric poems, Divan-e Shams-e Tabrizi. He himself went out searching for Shams and journeyed again to Damascus. There, he realised: Why should I seek? I am the same as He. His essence speaks through me. I have been looking for myself![54] Later life and death Double-page illuminated frontispiece, 1st book (Persian: دفتر, "daftar") of the Collection of poems (Masnavi-i ma'navi), 1461 manuscript Mewlana had been spontaneously composing ghazals (Persian poems), and these had been collected in the Divan-i Kabir or Diwan Shams Tabrizi. Rumi found another companion in Salaḥ ud-Din-e Zarkub, a goldsmith. After Salah ud-Din's death, Rumi's scribe and favourite student, Hussam-e Chalabi, assumed the role of Rumi's companion. One day, the two of them were wandering through the Meram vineyards outside Konya when Hussam described to Rumi an idea he had had: "If you were to write a book like the Ilāhīnāma of Sanai or the Mantiq ut-Tayr of 'Attar, it would become the companion of many troubadours. They would fill their hearts from your work and compose music to accompany it." Rumi smiled and took out a piece of paper on which were written the opening eighteen lines of his Masnavi, beginning with: Listen to the reed and the tale it tells, How it sings of separation...[55] Hussam implored Rumi to write more. Rumi spent the next twelve years of his life in Anatolia dictating the six volumes of this masterwork, the Masnavi, to Hussam. In December 1273, Rumi fell ill; he predicted his own death and composed the well-known ghazal, which begins with the verse: How doest thou know what sort of king I have within me as companion? Do not cast thy glance upon my golden face, for I have iron legs.[56] Tomb shrine of Rumi, Konya Rumi died on 17 December 1273 in Konya. His death was mourned by the diverse community of Konya, with local Christians and Jews joining the crowd that converged to bid farewell as his body was carried through the city.[57] Rumi's body was interred beside that of his father, and a splendid shrine, the "Green Tomb" (Turkish: Yeşil Türbe, Arabic: قبة الخضراء; today the Mevlâna Museum), was erected over his place of burial. His epitaph reads: When we are dead, seek not our tomb in the earth, but find it in the hearts of men.[58] Georgian princess and Seljuq queen Gurju Khatun was a close friend of Rumi. She was the one who sponsored the construction of his tomb in Konya.[59] The 13th century Mevlâna Mausoleum, with its mosque, dance hall, schools and living quarters for dervishes, remains a destination of pilgrimage to this day, and is probably the most popular pilgrimage site to be regularly visited by adherents of every major religion.[57] Teachings Maṭnawīye Ma'nawī, Mevlana Museum, Konya, Turkey Like other mystic and Sufi poets of Persian literature, Rumi's poetry speaks of love which infuses the world. Rumi's teachings also express the tenets summarized in the Quranic verse which Shams-e Tabrizi cited as the essence of prophetic guidance: "Know that ‘There is no god but He,’ and ask forgiveness for your sin" (Q. 47:19). In the interpretation attributed to Shams, the first part of the verse commands the humanity to seek knowledge of tawhid (oneness of God), while the second instructs them to negate their own existence. In Rumi's terms, tawhid is lived most fully through love, with the connection being made explicit in his verse that describes love as "that flame which, when it blazes up, burns away everything except the Everlasting Beloved."[60] Rumi's longing and desire to attain this ideal is evident in the following poem from his book the Masnavi:[61] از جمادی مُردم و نامی شدم وز نما مُردم به حیوان برزدم مُردم از حیوانی و آدم شدم پس چه ترسم کی ز مردن کم شدم؟ حملهٔ دیگر بمیرم از بشر تا برآرم از ملائک بال و پر وز ملک هم بایدم جستن ز جو کل شیء هالک الا وجهه بار دیگر از ملک پران شوم آنچ اندر وهم ناید آن شوم پس عدم گردم عدم چون ارغنون گویدم که انا الیه راجعون I died to the mineral state and became a plant, I died to the vegetal state and reached animality, I died to the animal state and became a man, Then what should I fear? I have never become less from dying. At the next charge (forward) I will die to human nature, So that I may lift up (my) head and wings (and soar) among the angels, And I must (also) jump from the river of (the state of) the angel, Everything perishes except His Face, Once again I will become sacrificed from (the state of) the angel, I will become that which cannot come into the imagination, Then I will become non-existent; non-existence says to me (in tones) like an organ, Truly, to Him is our return. The Masnavi weaves fables, scenes from everyday life, Qur'anic revelations and exegesis, and metaphysics into a vast and intricate tapestry. Rumi believed passionately in the use of music, poetry and dance as a path for reaching God. For Rumi, music helped devotees to focus their whole being on the divine and to do this so intensely that the soul was both destroyed and resurrected. It was from these ideas that the practice of whirling Dervishes developed into a ritual form. His teachings became the base for the order of the Mevlevi, which his son Sultan Walad organised. Rumi encouraged Sama, listening to music and turning or doing the sacred dance. In the Mevlevi tradition, samāʿ represents a mystical journey of spiritual ascent through mind and love to the Perfect One. In this journey, the seeker symbolically turns towards the truth, grows through love, abandons the ego, finds the truth and arrives at the Perfect. The seeker then returns from this spiritual journey, with greater maturity, to love and to be of service to the whole of creation without discrimination with regard to beliefs, races, classes and nations.[citation needed] In other verses in the Masnavi, Rumi describes in detail the universal message of love: The lover's cause is separate from all other causes Love is the astrolabe of God's mysteries.[62] Rumi's favourite musical instrument was the ney (reed flute).[23] Major works An Ottoman era manuscript depicting Rumi and Shams-e Tabrizi. Rumi's poetry is often divided into various categories: the quatrains (rubayāt) and odes (ghazal) of the Divan, the six books of the Masnavi. The prose works are divided into The Discourses, The Letters, and the Seven Sermons. Poetic works Bowl of Reflections with Rumi's poetry, early 13th century; Brooklyn Museum Rumi's best-known work is the Maṭnawīye Ma'nawī (Spiritual Couplets; مثنوی معنوی). The six-volume poem holds a distinguished place within the rich tradition of Persian Sufi literature, and has been commonly called "the Quran in Persian".[63][64] Many commentators have regarded it as the greatest mystical poem in world literature.[65] It contains approximately 27,000 lines,[66] each consisting of a couplet with an internal rhyme.[57] While the mathnawi genre of poetry may use a variety of different metres, after Rumi composed his poem, the metre he used became the mathnawi metre par excellence. The first recorded use of this metre for a mathnawi poem took place at the Nizari Ismaili fortress of Girdkuh between 1131–1139. It likely set the stage for later poetry in this style by mystics such as Attar and Rumi.[67] Rumi's other major work is the Dīwān-e Kabīr (Great Work) or Dīwān-e Shams-e Tabrīzī (The Works of Shams of Tabriz; دیوان شمس تبریزی), named in honour of Rumi's master Shams. Besides approximately 35000 Persian couplets and 2000 Persian quatrains,[68] the Divan contains 90 Ghazals and 19 quatrains in Arabic,[69] a couple of dozen or so couplets in Turkish (mainly macaronic poems of mixed Persian and Turkish)[70][71] and 14 couplets in Greek (all of them in three macaronic poems of Greek-Persian).[12][72][73] Prose works Fihi Ma Fihi (In It What's in It, Persian: فیه ما فیه) provides a record of seventy-one talks and lectures given by Rumi on various occasions to his disciples. It was compiled from the notes of his various disciples, so Rumi did not author the work directly.[74] An English translation from the Persian was first published by A.J. Arberry as Discourses of Rumi (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1972), and a translation of the second book by Wheeler Thackston, Sign of the Unseen (Putney, VT: Threshold Books, 1994). The style of the Fihi ma fihi is colloquial and meant for middle-class men and women, and lack the sophisticated wordplay.[75] Majāles-e Sab'a (Seven Sessions, Persian: مجالس سبعه) contains seven Persian sermons (as the name implies) or lectures given in seven different assemblies. The sermons themselves give a commentary on the deeper meaning of Qur'an and Hadith. The sermons also include quotations from poems of Sana'i, 'Attar, and other poets, including Rumi himself. As Aflakī relates, after Shams-e Tabrīzī, Rumi gave sermons at the request of notables, especially Salāh al-Dīn Zarkūb. The style of Persian is rather simple, but quotation of Arabic and knowledge of history and the Hadith show Rumi's knowledge in the Islamic sciences. His style is typical of the genre of lectures given by Sufis and spiritual teachers.[76] Makatib (The Letters, Persian: مکاتیب) or Maktubat (مکتوبات) is the collection of letters written in Persian by Rumi to his disciples, family members, and men of state and of influence. The letters testify that Rumi kept very busy helping family members and administering a community of disciples that had grown up around them. Unlike the Persian style of the previous two mentioned works (which are lectures and sermons), the letters are consciously sophisticated and epistolary in style, which is in conformity with the expectations of correspondence directed to nobles, statesmen and kings.[77] Religious outlook It is undeniable that Rumi was a Muslim scholar and took Islam seriously. Nonetheless, the depth of his spiritual vision extended beyond narrow understanding sectarian concerns. One quatrain reads: در راه طلب عاقل و دیوانه یکی است در شیوه‌ی عشق خویش و بیگانه یکی است آن را که شراب وصل جانان دادند در مذهب او کعبه و بتخانه یکی است On the seeker's path, the wise and crazed are one. In the way of love, kin and strangers are one. The one who they gave the wine of the beloved's union, in his path, the Kaaba and house of idols are one.[78] —Quatrain 305 According to the Quran, Muhammad is a mercy sent by God.[79] In regards to this, Rumi states: "The Light of Muhammad does not abandon a Zoroastrian or Jew in the world. May the shade of his good fortune shine upon everyone! He brings all of those who are led astray into the Way out of the desert."[80] Rumi, however, asserts the supremacy of Islam by stating: "The Light of Muhammad has become a thousand branches (of knowledge), a thousand, so that both this world and the next have been seized from end to end. If Muhammad rips the veil open from a single such branch, thousands of monks and priests will tear the string of false belief from around their waists."[81] Many of Rumi's poems suggest the importance of outward religious observance and the primacy of the Qur'an.[82] Flee to God's Qur'an, take refuge in it there with the spirits of the prophets merge. The Book conveys the prophets' circumstances those fish of the pure sea of Majesty.[83] Rumi states: I am the servant of the Qur'an as long as I have life. I am the dust on the path of Muhammad, the Chosen one. If anyone quotes anything except this from my sayings, I am quit of him and outraged by these words.[84] Rumi also states: I "sewed" my two eyes shut from [desires for] this world and the next – this I learned from Muhammad.[85] On the first page of the Masnavi, Rumi states: "Hadha kitâbu 'l- mathnawîy wa huwa uSûlu uSûli uSûli 'd-dîn wa kashshâfu 'l-qur'ân." "This is the book of the Masnavi, and it is the roots of the roots of the roots of the (Islamic) Religion and it is the Explainer of the Qur'ân."[86] Hadi Sabzavari, one of Iran's most important 19th-century philosophers, makes the following connection between the Masnavi and Islam, in the introduction to his philosophical commentary on the book: It is a commentary on the versified exegesis [of the Qur’ān] and its occult mystery, since all of it [all of the Mathnawī] is, as you will see, an elucidation of the clear verses [of the Qur’ān], a clarification of prophetic utterances, a glimmer of the light of the luminous Qur’ān, and burning embers irradiating their rays from its shining lamp. As respects to hunting through the treasure-trove of the Qur’ān, one can find in it [the Mathnawī] all [the Qur’ān's] ancient philosophical wisdom; it [the Mathnawī] is all entirely eloquent philosophy. In truth, the pearly verse of the poem combines the Canon Law of Islam (sharīʿa) with the Sufi Path (ṭarīqa) and the Divine Reality (ḥaqīqa); the author's [Rūmī] achievement belongs to God in his bringing together of the Law (sharīʿa), the Path, and the Truth in a way that includes critical intellect, profound thought, a brilliant natural temperament, and integrity of character that is endowed with power, insight, inspiration, and illumination.[87] Seyyed Hossein Nasr states: One of the greatest living authorities on Rûmî in Persia today, Hâdî Hâ'irî, has shown in an unpublished work that some 6,000 verses of the Dîwân and the Mathnawî are practically direct translations of Qur'ânic verses into Persian poetry.[88] Rumi states in his Dīwān: The Sufi is hanging on to Muhammad, like Abu Bakr.[89] Legacy Universality Rumi's work has been translated into many of the world's languages, including Russian, German, Urdu, Turkish, Arabic, Bengali, French, Italian, and Spanish, and is being presented in a growing number of formats, including concerts, workshops, readings, dance performances, and other artistic creations.[90] The English interpretations of Rumi's poetry by Coleman Barks have sold more than half a million copies worldwide,[91] and Rumi is one of the most widely read poets in the United States.[92] Iranian world پارسی گو گرچه تازی خوشتر است — عشق را خود صد زبان دیگر است Say it in Persian although in Arabic sounds better—Love, however, has its own many other dialects These cultural, historical and linguistic ties between Rumi and Iran have made Rumi an iconic Iranian poet, and some of the most important Rumi scholars including Foruzanfar, Naini, Sabzewari, etc., have come from modern Iran.[93] Rumi's poetry is displayed on the walls of many cities across Iran, sung in Persian music,[93] and read in school books.[94] Rumi's poetry forms the basis of much classical Iranian and Afghan music.[95][96] Contemporary classical interpretations of his poetry are made by Muhammad Reza Shajarian, Shahram Nazeri, Davood Azad (the three from Iran) and Ustad Mohammad Hashem Cheshti (Afghanistan). Mewlewī Sufi Order; Rumi and Turkey Main articles: Mevlevi Order and Sama (Sufism) The Mewlewī Sufi order was founded in 1273 by Rumi's followers after his death.[97] His first successor could have been Salah-eddin Zarkoub who served Rumi for a decade and Rumi revered him highly in his poets. Zarkoub was illiterate and uttered some words incorrectly. Rumi used some of these incorrect words in his poems to express his support and humility towards Zarkoub. Rumi named him his successor but Zarkoub died sooner than him.[98] So Rumi's first successor in the rectorship of the order was "Husam Chalabi" and, after Chalabi's death in 1284, Rumi's younger and only surviving son, Sultan Walad (d. 1312), popularly known as author of the mystical Maṭnawī Rabābnāma, or the Book of the Rabab was installed as grand master of the order.[99] The leadership of the order has been kept within Rumi's family in Konya uninterruptedly since then.[100] The Mewlewī Sufis, also known as Whirling Dervishes, believe in performing their dhikr in the form of Sama. During the time of Rumi (as attested in the Manāqib ul-Ārefīn of Aflākī), his followers gathered for musical and "turning" practices. According to tradition, Rumi was himself a notable musician who played the robāb, although his favourite instrument was the ney or reed flute.[101] The music accompanying the samāʿ consists of settings of poems from the Maṭnawī and Dīwān-e Kabīr, or of Sultan Walad's poems.[101] The Mawlawīyah was a well-established Sufi order in the Ottoman Empire, and many of the members of the order served in various official positions of the Caliphate. The centre for the Mevlevi was in Konya. There is also a Mewlewī monastery (درگاه, dargāh) in Istanbul near the Galata Tower in which the samāʿ is performed and accessible to the public. The Mewlewī order issues an invitation to people of all backgrounds: Come, come, whoever you are, Wanderer, idolater, worshiper of fire, Come even though you have broken your vows a thousand times, Come, and come yet again. Ours is not a caravan of despair.[102] Rumi's tomb in Konya, Turkey During Ottoman times, the Mevlevi produced a number of notable poets and musicians, including Sheikh Ghalib, Ismail Rusuhi Dede of Ankara, Esrar Dede, Halet Efendi, and Gavsi Dede, who are all buried at the Galata Mewlewī Khāna (Turkish: Mevlevi-Hane) in Istanbul.[103] Music, especially that of the ney, plays an important part in the Mevlevi. With the foundation of the modern, secular Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk removed religion from the sphere of public policy and restricted it exclusively to that of personal morals, behaviour and faith. On 13 December 1925, a law was passed closing all the tekkes (dervish lodges) and zāwiyas (chief dervish lodges), and the centres of veneration to which visits (ziyārat) were made. Istanbul alone had more than 250 tekkes as well as small centres for gatherings of various fraternities; this law dissolved the Sufi Orders, prohibited the use of mystical names, titles and costumes pertaining to their titles, impounded the Orders' assets, and banned their ceremonies and meetings. The law also provided penalties for those who tried to re-establish the Orders. Two years later, in 1927, the Mausoleum of Mevlâna in Konya was allowed to reopen as a Museum.[104] In the 1950s, the Turkish government began allowing the Whirling Dervishes to perform once a year in Konya. The Mewlānā festival is held over two weeks in December; its culmination is on 17 December, the Urs of Mewlānā (anniversary of Rumi's death), called Šab-e Arūs (Persian: شبِ عُرس) (Persian meaning "nuptial night"), the night of Rumi's union with God.[105] In 1974, the Whirling Dervishes were permitted to travel to the West for the first time. In 2005, UNESCO proclaimed "The Mevlevi Sama Ceremony" of Turkey as one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.[106] Rumi and his mausoleum on the reverse of the 5000 Turkish lira banknotes of 1981–1994 Rumi and his mausoleum were depicted on the reverse of the 5000 Turkish lira banknotes of 1981–1994.[107] Religious denomination As Edward G. Browne noted, the three most prominent mystical Persian poets, Rumi, Sanai and Attar, were all Sunni Muslims and their poetry abounds with praise for the first two caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattāb.[108] According to Annemarie Schimmel, the tendency among Shia authors to anachronistically include leading mystical poets such as Rumi and Attar among their own ranks, became stronger after the introduction of Twelver Shia as the state religion in the Safavid Empire in 1501.[109] Eight hundredth anniversary celebrations Rumi in Stamp of Afghanistan, 1968 In Afghanistan, Rumi is known as Mawlānā, in Turkey as Mevlâna, and in Iran as Molavī. At the proposal of the Permanent Delegations of Afghanistan, Iran, and Turkey, and as approved by its executive board and General Conference in conformity with its mission of "constructing in the minds of men the defences of peace", UNESCO was associated with the celebration, in 2007, of the eight hundredth anniversary of Rumi's birth.[110] The commemoration at UNESCO itself took place on 6 September 2007;[111] UNESCO issued a medal in Rumi's name in the hope that it would prove an encouragement to those who are engaged in research on and dissemination of Rumi's ideas and ideals, which would, in turn, enhance the diffusion of the ideals of UNESCO.[112] On 30 September 2007, Iranian school bells were rung throughout the country in honour of Mewlana.[113] Also in that year, Iran held a Rumi Week from 26 October to 2 November. An international ceremony and conference were held in Tehran; the event was opened by the Iranian president and the chairman of the Iranian parliament. Scholars from twenty-nine countries attended the events, and 450 articles were presented at the conference.[114] Iranian musician Shahram Nazeri was awarded the Légion d'honneur and Iran's House of Music Award in 2007 for his renowned works on Rumi masterpieces.[115] 2007 was declared as the "International Rumi Year" by UNESCO.[116][117] Also on 30 September 2007, Turkey celebrated Rumi's eight-hundredth birthday with a giant Whirling Dervish ritual performance of the samāʿ, which was televised using forty-eight cameras and broadcast live in eight countries. Ertugrul Gunay, of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism, stated, "Three hundred dervishes are scheduled to take part in this ritual, making it the largest performance of sema in history."[118] Mawlana Rumi Review The Mawlana Rumi Review[119] is published annually by The Centre for Persian and Iranian Studies at the University of Exeter in collaboration with The Rumi Institute in Nicosia, Cyprus, and Archetype Books[120] in Cambridge.[120] The first volume was published in 2010, and it has come out annually since then. According to the principal editor of the journal, Leonard Lewisohn: "Although a number of major Islamic poets easily rival the likes of Dante, Shakespeare and Milton in importance and output, they still enjoy only a marginal literary fame in the West because the works of Arabic and Persian thinkers, writers and poets are considered as negligible, frivolous, tawdry sideshows beside the grand narrative of the Western Canon. It is the aim of the Mawlana Rumi Review to redress this carelessly inattentive approach to world literature, which is something far more serious than a minor faux pas committed by the Western literary imagination."[121] See also Poetry portal Islam portal General Blind men and an elephant Sant Mat Symphony No. 3 (Szymanowski) Poems by Rumi Rumi ghazal 163 On Persian culture Iranian philosophy List of Persian poets and authors Ferdowsi (c. 940–1020), poet, arguably the most influential figure in Persian literature Hafez, Persian poet Persian literature Persian mysticism Tajik people Rumi scholars and writers Hamid Algar Rahim Arbab William Chittick Badiozzaman Forouzanfar Hossein Elahi Ghomshei Fatemeh Keshavarz Majid M. Naini Seyyed Hossein Nasr Franklin Lewis François Pétis de la Croix Annemarie Schimmel Dariush Shayegan Abdolkarim Soroush Abdolhamid Ziaei Abdolhossein Zarinkoob English translators of Rumi poetry Arthur John Arberry William Chittick Ravan A.G. Farhadi Nader Khalili Daniel Ladinsky Franklin Lewis Majid M. Naini Reynold A. Nicholson James Redhouse Shahriar Shahriari[122] Shahram Shiva References ^ a b Ritter, H.; Bausani, A. "ḎJ̲alāl al-Dīn Rūmī b. Bahāʾ al-Dīn Sulṭān al-ʿulamāʾ Walad b. Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad Ḵh̲aṭībī." Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2007. Brill Online. Excerpt: "known by the sobriquet Mewlānā, persian poet and founder of the Mewlewiyya order of dervishes" ^ Harmless, William (2007). Mystics. Oxford University Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-19-804110-8. ^ a b c d e f Annemarie Schimmel, "I Am Wind, You Are Fire," p. 11. She refers to a 1989 article by Fritz Meier: Tajiks and Persian admirers still prefer to call Jalaluddin 'Balkhi' because his family lived in Balkh, current day in Afghanistan before migrating westward. However, their home was not in the actual city of Balkh, since the mid-eighth century a center of Muslim culture in (Greater) Khorasan (Iran and Central Asia). Rather, as Meier has shown, it was in the small town of Wakhsh north of the Oxus that Baha'uddin Walad, Jalaluddin's father, lived and worked as a jurist and preacher with mystical inclinations. Franklin Lewis, Rumi : Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, 2000, pp. 47–49. Lewis has devoted two pages of his book to the topic of Wakhsh, which he states has been identified with the medieval town of Lêwkand (or Lâvakand) or Sangtude, which is about 65 kilometers southeast of Dushanbe, the capital of present-day Tajikistan. He says it is on the east bank of the Vakhshâb river, a major tributary that joins the Amu Daryâ river (also called Jayhun, and named the Oxus by the Greeks). He further states: "Bahâ al-Din may have been born in Balkh, but at least between June 1204 and 1210 (Shavvâl 600 and 607), during which time Rumi was born, Bahâ al-Din resided in a house in Vakhsh (Bah 2:143 [= Bahâ' uddîn Walad's] book, "Ma`ârif."). Vakhsh, rather than Balkh was the permanent base of Bahâ al-Din and his family until Rumi was around five years old (mei 16–35) [= from a book in German by the scholar Fritz Meier—note inserted here]. At that time, in about the year 1212 (A.H. 608–609), the Valads moved to Samarqand (Fih 333; Mei 29–30, 36) [= reference to Rumi's "Discourses" and to Fritz Meier's book—note inserted here], leaving behind Baâ al-Din's mother, who must have been at least seventy-five years old." ^ The Complete Idiot's Guide to Rumi Meditations, Penguin Group, 2008, p. 48, ISBN 9781592577361 ^ Lewis, Franklin D. (2014). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The life, Teaching and poetry of Jalal Al-Din Rumi. Simon and Schuster. pp. 15–16, 52, 60, 89. ^ Zarrinkoob, Abdolhossein (2005). Serr-e Ney. Vol. 1. Instisharat-i Ilmi. p. 447. ^ Ramin Jahanbegloo, In Search of the Sacred : A Conversation with Seyyed Hossein Nasr on His Life and Thought, ABC-CLIO (2010), p. 141 ^ Lewis, Franklin D. (2008). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The life, Teaching and poetry of Jalal Al-Din Rumi. Oneworld Publication. p. 9. How is that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as in Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere, in what is now Turkey, some 1,500 miles to the west? ^ Schimmel, Annemarie (7 April 1994). The Mystery of Numbers. Oxford University Press. p. 51. These examples are taken from the Persian mystic Rumi's work, not from Chinese, but they express the yang-yin [sic] relationship with perfect lucidity. ^ a b Annemarie Schimmel, The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of Jalaloddin Rumi, SUNY Press, 1993, p. 193: "Rumi's mother tongue was Persian, but he had learned during his stay in Konya, enough Turkish and Greek to use it, now and then, in his verse." ^ a b Franklin Lewis: "On the question of Rumi's multilingualism (pp. 315–317), we may still say that he spoke and wrote in Persian as a native language, wrote and conversed in Arabic as a learned "foreign" language and could at least get by at the market in Turkish and Greek (although some wildly extravagant claims have been made about his command of Attic Greek, or his native tongue being Turkish) (Lewis 2008:xxi). (Franklin Lewis, "Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi," One World Publication Limited, 2008). Franklin also points out that: "Living among Turks, Rumi also picked up some colloquial Turkish."(Franklin Lewis, "Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi," One World Publication Limited, 2008, p. 315). He also mentions Rumi composed thirteen lines in Greek (Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, One World Publication Limited, 2008, p. 316). On Rumi's son, Sultan Walad, Franklin mentions: "Sultan Walad elsewhere admits that he has little knowledge of Turkish" (Sultan Walad): Franklin Lewis, Rumi, "Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, One World Publication Limited, 2008, p. 239) and "Sultan Valad did not feel confident about his command of Turkish" (Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000, p. 240) ^ a b Δέδες, Δ. (1993). "Ποιήματα του Μαυλανά Ρουμή" [Poems by Mowlānā Rūmī]. Τα Ιστορικά. 10 (18–19): 3–22. ^ Meyer, Gustav (1895). "Die griechischen Verse im Rabâbnâma". Byzantinische Zeitschrift. 4 (3). doi:10.1515/byzs.1895.4.3.401. S2CID 191615267. ^ "Greek Verses of Rumi & Sultan Walad". uci.edu. 22 April 2009. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. ^ Gardet, Louis (1977). "Religion and Culture". In Holt, P.M.; Lambton, Ann K.S.; Lewis, Bernard (eds.). The Cambridge History of Islam, Part VIII: Islamic Society and Civilization. Cambridge University Press. p. 586. It is sufficient to mention 'Aziz al-Din Nasafi, Farid al-Din 'Attar and Sa'adi, and above all Jalal al-Din Rumi, whose Mathnawi remains one of the purest literary glories of Persia ^ a b C.E. Bosworth, "Turkmen Expansion towards the west" in UNESCO History of Humanity, Volume IV, titled "From the Seventh to the Sixteenth Century", UNESCO Publishing / Routledge, p. 391: "While the Arabic language retained its primacy in such spheres as law, theology and science, the culture of the Seljuk court and secular literature within the sultanate became largely Persianized; this is seen in the early adoption of Persian epic names by the Seljuk rulers (Qubād, Kay Khusraw and so on) and in the use of Persian as a literary language (Turkmen must have been essentially a vehicle for everyday speech at this time). The process of Persianization accelerated in the 13th century with the presence in Konya of two of the most distinguished refugees fleeing before the Mongols, Bahā' al-Dīn Walad and his son Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, whose Mathnawī, composed in Konya, constitutes one of the crowning glories of classical Persian literature." ^ a b "Rumi work translated into Kurdish". 30 January 2015. ^ a b Seyyed, Hossein Nasr (1987). Islamic Art and Spirituality. Suny Press. p. 115. Jalal al-Din was born in a major center of Persian culture, Balkh, from Persian speaking parents, and is the product of that Islamic Persian culture which in the 7th/13th century dominated the 'whole of the eastern lands of Islam and to which present day Persians as well as Turks, Afghans, Central Asian Muslims and the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistani subcontinent are heir. It is precisely in this world that the sun of his spiritual legacy has shone most brillianty during the past seven centuries. The father of Jalal al-Din, Muhammad ibn Husayn Khatibi, known as Baha al-Din Walad and entitled Sultan al-'ulama', was an outstanding Sufi in Balkh connected to the spiritual lineage of Najm al-Din Kubra. ^ Rahman, Aziz (27 August 2015). "Nazrul: The rebel and the romantic". Daily Sun. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2016. ^ Khan, Mahmudur Rahman (30 September 2018). "A tribute to Jalaluddin Rumi". Daily Sun. ^ "Interview: 'Many Americans Love Rumi...But They Prefer He Not Be Muslim'". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. 9 August 2010. Retrieved 22 August 2016. ^ "Interview: A mystical journey with Rumi". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 16 August 2010. Retrieved 22 August 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) ^ a b Charles Haviland (30 September 2007). "The roar of Rumi—800 years on". BBC News. Retrieved 30 September 2007. ^ "Dîvân-i Kebîr Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī". OMI – Old Manuscripts & Incunabula. Retrieved 22 August 2016. ^ Ciabattari, Jane (21 October 2014). "Why is Rumi the best-selling poet in the US?". BBC News. Retrieved 22 August 2016. ^ Tompkins, Ptolemy (29 October 2002). "Rumi Rules!". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 22 August 2016. ^ Sipahsalar, Faridun bin Ahmad (1946). Sa'id Nafisi (ed.). Risala-yi Ahwal-i Mawlana. Tehran. p. 5.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) ^ Rumi (2015). Selected Poems. Penguin Books. p. 350. ISBN 978-0-14-196911-4. ^ Franklin Lewis (2008). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teachings and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi. One World Publication Limited. p. 9. ^ "ملای روم" in Dehkhoda Dictionary ^ H. Ritter, 1991, DJALĀL al-DĪN RŪMĪ, The Encyclopaedia of Islam (Volume II: C–G), 393. ^ Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (Maulana), Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Islam: Selections from His Stories, Poems, and Discourses, Annotated & Explained, SkyLight Paths Publishing, 2004. ^ Yalman, Suzan (7 July 2016), "Badr al-Dīn Tabrīzī", Encyclopaedia of Islam THREE, Brill, retrieved 7 June 2023, Badr al-Dīn Tabrīzī was the architect of the original tomb built for Mawlānā Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī (d. 672/1273, in Konya), the great Persian mystic and poet. ^ a b Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Islamic Art and Spirituality, SUNY Press, 1987. p. 115: "Jalal al-Din was born in a major center of Persian culture, Balkh, from Persian speaking parents, and is the product of that Islamic Persian culture which in the 7th/13th century dominated the 'whole of the eastern lands of Islam and to which present day Persians as well as Turks, Afghans, Central Asian Muslims and the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistani and the Muslims of the Indo-Pakistani subcontinent are heir. It is precisely in this world that the sun of his spiritual legacy has shone most brilliantly during the past seven centuries. The father of Jalal al-Din, Muhammad ibn Husayn Khatibi, known as Baha al-Din Walad and entitled Sultan al-'ulama', was an outstanding Sufi in Balkh connected to the spiritual lineage of Najm al-Din Kubra." ^ Franklin Lewis: Rumi: Past and Present, East and West. The Life Teachings and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi. One World Publications, Oxford 2000, S. 47. ^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The life, Teaching and poetry of Jalal Al-Din Rumi, Oneworld Publication Limited, 2008 p. 9: "How is that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere" ^ Maqsood Jafrī, The gleam of wisdom, Sigma Press, 2003. p. 238: "Rumi has influenced a large number of writers while on the other hand he himself was under the great influence of Sanai and Attar. ^ A.J. Arberry, Sufism: An Account of the Mystics of Islam, Courier Dover Publications, Nov 9, 2001. p. 141 ^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, The Garden of Truth: The Vision and Promise of Sufism, Islam's Mystical Tradition HarperCollins, Sep 2, 2008. page 130: "Attar has traversed the seven cities of Love, We are still at the turn of one street!" ^ Grousset, Rene, The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia, (Rutgers University Press, 2002), 157; "...the Seljuk court at Konya adopted Persian as its official language". ^ Aḥmad of Niǧde's "al-Walad al-Shafīq" and the Seljuk Past, A.C.S. Peacock, Anatolian Studies, Vol. 54, (2004), 97; With the growth of Seljuk power in Rum, a more highly developed Muslim cultural life, based on the Persianate culture of the Great Seljuk court, was able to take root in Anatolia ^ Carter Vaughn Findley, The Turks in World History, Oxford University Press, 11 November 2004. p. 72: Meanwhile, amid the migratory swarm that Turkified Anatolia, the dispersion of learned men from the Persian-speaking east paradoxically made the Seljuks court at Konya a new center for Persian court culture, as exemplified by the great mystical poet Jelaleddin Rumi (1207–1273). ^ Barks, Coleman, Rumi: The Book of Love: Poems of Ecstasy and Longing, HarperCollins, 2005, p. xxv, ISBN 978-0-06-075050-3 ^ Note: Rumi's shrine is now known as the "Mevlâna Museum" in Turkey. ^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000. How is it that a Persian boy born almost eight hundred years ago in Khorasan, the northeastern province of greater Iran, in a region that we identify today as Central Asia, but was considered in those days as part of the Greater Persian cultural sphere, wound up in Central Anatolia on the receding edge of the Byzantine cultural sphere, in which is now Turkey ^ a b Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). pp. 90–92: "Baha al-Din’s disciples also traced his family lineage to the first caliph, Abu Bakr (Sep 9; Af 7; JNO 457; Dow 213). This probably stems from willful confusion over his paternal great grandmother, who was the daughter of Abu Bakr of Sarakhs, a noted jurist (d. 1090). The most complete genealogy offered for family stretches back only six or seven generations and cannot reach to Abu Bakr, the companion and first caliph of the Prophet, who died two years after the Prophet, in C.E. 634 (FB 5–6 n.3)." ^ FUNDAMENTALS OF RUMI'S THOUGHT, Tughra Books, 2006, ISBN 9781597846134 ^ H. Algar, “BAHĀʾ-AL-DĪN MOḤAMMAD WALAD“, Encyclopedia Iranica. There is no reference to such descent in the works of Bahāʾ-e Walad and Mawlānā Jalāl-al-Dīn or in the inscriptions on their sarcophagi. The attribution may have arisen from confusion between the caliph and another Abū Bakr, Šams-al-Aʾemma Abū Bakr Saraḵsī (d. 483/1090), the well-known Hanafite jurist, whose daughter, Ferdows Ḵātūn, was the mother of Aḥmad Ḵaṭīb, Bahāʾ-e Walad's grandfather (see Forūzānfar, Resāla, p. 6). Tradition also links Bahāʾ-e Walad's lineage to the Ḵᵛārazmšāh[check spelling] dynasty. His mother is said to have been the daughter of ʿAlāʾ-al-Dīn Moḥammad Ḵārazmšāh[check spelling] (d. 596/1200), but this appears to be excluded for chronological reasons (Forūzānfar, Resāla, p. 7) ^ (Ritter, H.; Bausani, A. "ḎJalāl al- Dīn Rūmī b. Bahāʾ al-Dīn Sulṭān al-ʿulamāʾ Walad b. Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad Ḵhaṭībī ." Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel and W.P. Heinrichs. Brill, 2009. Brill Online. Excerpt: "known by the sobriquet Mawlānā (Mevlâna), Persian poet and founder of the Mawlawiyya order of dervishes"): "The assertions that his family tree goes back to Abū Bakr, and that his mother was a daughter of the Ḵhwārizmshāh ʿAlāʾ al-Dīn Muḥammad (Aflākī, i, 8–9) do not hold on closer examination (B. Furūzānfarr, Mawlānā Ḏjalāl Dīn, Tehrān 1315, 7; ʿAlīnaḳī Sharīʿatmadārī, Naḳd-i matn-i mathnawī, in Yaghmā, xii (1338), 164; Aḥmad Aflākī, Ariflerin menkibeleri, trans. Tahsin Yazıcı, Ankara 1953, i, Önsöz, 44).") ^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 44:“Baha al-Din’s father, Hosayn, had been a religious scholar with a bent for asceticism, occupied like his own father before him, Ahmad, with the family profession of preacher (khatib). Of the four canonical schools of Sunni Islam, the family adhered to the relatively liberal Hanafi fiqh. Hosayn-e Khatibi enjoyed such renown in his youth—so says Aflaki with characteristic exaggeration—that Razi al-Din Nayshapuri and other famous scholars came to study with him (Af 9; for the legend about Baha al-Din, see below, "The Mythical Baha al-Din"). Another report indicates that Baha al-Din's grandfather, Ahmad al-Khatibi, was born to Ferdows Khatun, a daughter of the reputed Hanafite jurist and author Shams al-A’emma Abu Bakr of Sarakhs, who died circa 1088 (Af 75; FB 6 n.4; Mei 74 n. 17). This is far from implausible and, if true, would tend to suggest that Ahmad al-Khatabi had studied under Shams al-A’emma. Prior to that the family could supposedly trace its roots back to Isfahan. We do not learn the name of Baha al-Din's mother in the sources, only that he referred to her as "Mama" (Mami), and that she lived to the 1200s." (p. 44) ^ Ahmed, Akbar (2011). Suspended Somewhere Between: A Book of Verse. PM Press. pp. i. ISBN 978-1-60486-485-4. ^ El-Fers, Mohamed (2009). Mevlana Celaleddin Rumi. MokumTV. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-4092-9291-3. ^ "Hz. Mawlana and Shams". semazen.net. ^ The Essential Rumi. Translations by Coleman Barks, p. xx. ^ Rumi: Daylight: A Daybook of Spiritual Guidance. Shambhala Publications. 1999. ISBN 978-0-8348-2517-8. ^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (1987). Islamic Art and Spirituality. SUNY Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-88706-174-5. ^ a b c Jawid Mojaddedi (2004). "Introduction". Rumi, Jalal al-Din. The Masnavi, Book One. Oxford University Press (Kindle Edition). p. xix. ^ "Anatolia: Dot com to Paradise". 2 February 2002. Archived from the original on 2 February 2002. ^ Crane, H. (1993). "Notes on Saldjūq Architectural Patronage in Thirteenth Century Anatolia". Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient. 36 (1): 1–57. doi:10.1163/156852093X00010. JSTOR 3632470. ProQuest 1304344524. ^ William C. Chittick (2017). "RUMI, JALĀL-AL-DIN vii. Philosophy". Encyclopaedia Iranica. ^ Ibrahim Gamard (with gratitude for R.A. Nicholson's 1930 British translation). The Mathnawî-yé Ma'nawî – Rhymed Couplets of Deep Spiritual Meaning of Jalaluddin Rumi.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) ^ Naini, Majid. The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love. ^ Jawid Mojaddedi (2004). "Introduction". Rumi, Jalal al-Din. The Masnavi, Book One. Oxford University Press (Kindle Edition). p. xix. Rumi's Masnavi holds an exalted status in the rich canon of Persian Sufi literature as the greatest mystical poem ever written. It is even referred to commonly as 'the Koran in Persian'. ^ Abdul Rahman Jami notes: من چه گویم وصف آن عالی‌جناب — نیست پیغمبر ولی دارد کتاب مثنویّ معنویّ مولوی — هست قرآن در زبان پهلوی What can I say in praise of that great one? He is not a Prophet but has come with a book; The Spiritual Masnavi of Mowlavi Is the Qur'an in the language of Pahlavi (Persian). (Khawaja Abdul Hamid Irfani, "The Sayings of Rumi and Iqbal", Bazm-e-Rumi, 1976.) ^ Jawid Mojaddedi (2004). "Introduction". Rumi, Jalal al-Din. The Masnavi, Book One. Oxford University Press (Kindle Edition). pp. xii–xiii. Towards the end of his life he presented the fruit of his experience of Sufism in the form of the Masnavi, which has been judged by many commentators, both within the Sufi tradition and outside it, to be the greatest mystical poem ever written. ^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 306: "The manuscripts versions differ greatly in the size of the text and orthography. Nicholson’s text has 25,577 lines though the average medieval and early modern manuscripts contained around 27,000 lines, meaning the scribes added two thousand lines or about eight percent more to the poem composed by Rumi. Some manuscripts give as many as 32,000!" ^ Virani, Shafique N. (January 2019). "Persian Poetry, Sufism and Ismailism: The Testimony of Khwājah Qāsim Tushtarī's Recognizing God". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 29 (1): 17–49. doi:10.1017/S1356186318000494. S2CID 165288246. ProQuest 2300038453. ^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teaching, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, rev. ed. (2008). p. 314: “The Foruzanfar’s edition of the Divan-e Shams compromises 3229 ghazals and qasidas making a total of almost 35000 lines, not including several hundred lines of stanzaic poems and nearly two thousand quatrains attributed to him” ^ Dar al-Masnavi Website, accessed December 2009: According to the Dar al-Masnavi website: “In Forûzânfar's edition of Rumi's Divan, there are 90 ghazals (Vol. 1, 29; Vol. 2, 1; Vol. 3, 6; Vol. 4, 8; Vol. 5, 19, Vol. 6, 0; Vol. 7, 27) and 19 quatrains entirely in Arabic. In addition, there are ghazals which are all Arabic except for the final line; many have one or two lines in Arabic within the body of the poem; some have as many as 9–13 consecutive lines in Arabic, with Persian verses preceding and following; some have alternating lines in Persian, then Arabic; some have the first half of the verse in Persian, the second half in Arabic.” ^ Mecdut MensurOghlu: “The Divan of Jalal al-Din Rumi contains 35 couplets in Turkish and Turkish-Persian which have recently been published me” (Celal al-Din Rumi’s turkische Verse: UJb. XXIV (1952), pp. 106–115) ^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teaching, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, rev. ed. (2008): "“a couple of dozen at most of the 35,000 lines of the Divan-I Shams are in Turkish, and almost all of these lines occur in poems that are predominantly in Persian”" ^ "Untitled Document". ^ Franklin D. Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West: The Life, Teaching, and Poetry of Jalâl al-Din Rumi, rev. ed. (2008): "Three poems have bits of demotic Greek; these have been identified and translated into French, along with some Greek verses of Sultan Valad. Golpinarli (GM 416–417) indicates according to Vladimir Mir Mirughli, the Greek used in some of Rumi's macaronic poems reflects the demotic Greek of the inhabitants of Anatolia. Golpinarli then argues that Rumi knew classical Persian and Arabic with precision, but typically composes poems in a more popular or colloquial Persian and Arabic.". ^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West — The Life, Teachings, and Poetry of Jalal al-Din Rumi, Oneworld Publications, 2000, Chapter 7. ^ “As Safa points out (Saf 2:1206) the Discourse reflect the stylistics of oral speech and lacks the sophisticated word plays, Arabic vocabulary and sound patterning that we would except from a consciously literary text of this period. Once again, the style of Rumi as lecturer or orator in these discourses does not reflect an audience of great intellectual pretensions, but rather middle-class men and women, along with number of statesmen and rulers”” (Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 292) ^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 293 ^ Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2008 (revised edition). p. 295:“In contrast with the prose of his Discourses and sermons, the style of the letters is consciously sophisticated and epistolary, in conformity with the expectations of correspondence directed to nobles, statesmen and kings" ^ Rumi: 53 Secrets from the Tavern of Love, trans. by Amin Banani and Anthony A. Lee, p. 3 ^ Verse (21:107) – English Translation ^ Ibrahim Gamard (2004), Rumi and Islam, SkyLight Paths, p. 163, ISBN 978-1-59473-002-3 ^ Ibrahim Gamard (2004), Rumi and Islam, SkyLight Paths, p. 177, ISBN 978-1-59473-002-3 ^ Lewis 2000, pp. 407–408 ^ Lewis 2000, p. 408 ^ Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Self Discovery, Dar al Masnavi ^ Ibrahim Gamard (2004), Rumi and Islam, SkyLight Paths, p. 169, ISBN 978-1-59473-002-3 ^ About the Masnavi, Dar Al-Masnavi ^ Tasbihi, Eliza (2016). "Sabzawārī's Sharḥ-i Asrār: A Philosophical Commentary on Rūmīʾs 'Mathnawī'". Mawlana Rumi Review. 7: 175–196. doi:10.1163/25898566-00701009. JSTOR 45236376. ^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "Rumi and the Sufi Tradition," in Chelkowski (ed.), The Scholar and the Saint, p. 183 ^ Quoted in Ibrahim Gamard, Rumi and Islam: Selections from His Stories, Poems, and Discourses — Annotated and Explained, p. 171. ^ "Rumi Network by Shahram Shiva – The World's Most Popular Website on Rumi". rumi.net. ^ "University of Tehran". ut.ac.ir. Archived from the original on 7 May 2006. ^ Curiel, Jonathan, San Francisco Chronicle Staff Writer, Islamic verses: The influence of Muslim literature in the United States has grown stronger since the 11 Sep attacks (6 February 2005), Available online (Retrieved Aug 2006) ^ a b Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000. ^ See for example 4th grade Iranian school book where the story of the Parrot and Merchant from the Mathnawi is taught to students[verification needed] ^ Hiro, Dilip (1 November 2011). Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History of Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz stan, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Iran. The Overlook Press. ISBN 978-1-59020-378-1.[page needed] ^ Uyar, Yaprak Melike; Beşiroğlu, Ş. Şehvar (2014). "Recent representations of the music of the Mevlevi Order of Sufism". Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies. 6 (2): 137–150. doi:10.4407/jims.2014.02.002. ^ "Sufism". gmu.edu. ^ "Rumi's Special Companion Salah-eddin Zarkoub". ^ "Islamic Supreme Council of America – Islamic Supreme Council of America". www.islamicsupremecouncil.org. Archived from the original on 27 August 2013. ^ "Mevlâna Celâleddin Rumi". Archived from the original on 6 May 2007. Retrieved 19 May 2007. ^ a b "About the Mevlevi Order of America". hayatidede.org. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013. ^ Hanut, Eryk (2000). Rumi: The Card and Book Pack : Meditation, Inspiration, Self-discovery. The Rumi Card Book. Tuttle Publishing. xiii. ISBN 978-1-885203-95-3. ^ "Web Page Under Construction". Archived from the original on 25 March 2006. ^ Mango, Andrew, Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey, (2002), ISBN 978-1-58567-011-6. ^ "Intro". Archived from the original on 4 September 2006. ^ The Mevlevi Sema Ceremony UNESCO. ^ Banknote Museum: 7. Emission Group—Five Thousand Turkish Lira—I. Series Archived 2 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine, II. Series Archived 2 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine & III. Series. Retrieved on 20 April 2009. Archived 3 June 2009 at WebCite ^ Edward G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia from the Earliest Times Until Firdawsh, 543 pp., Adamant Media Corporation, 2002, ISBN 978-1-4021-6045-5, 978-1-4021-6045-5 (see p. 437) ^ Annemarie Schimmel, Deciphering the Signs of God, 302 pp., SUNY Press, 1994, ISBN 978-0-7914-1982-3, 978-0-7914-1982-3 (see p. 210) ^ "Haber, Haberler, Güncel Haberler, Ekonomi, Dünya, Gündem Haberleri, Son Dakika, – Zaman Gazetesi". zaman.com. Archived from the original on 17 March 2006. ^ "UNESCO: 800th Anniversary of the Birth of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi". UNESCO. 6 September 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2009. Retrieved 25 June 2014. The prominent Persian language poet, thinker and spiritual master, Mevlana Celaleddin Belhi-Rumi was born in 1207 in Balkh, presently Afghanistan. ^ "UNESCO. Executive Board; 175th; UNESCO Medal in honour of Mawlana Jalal-ud-Din Balkhi-Rumi; 2006" (PDF). UNESDOC – UNESCO Documents and Publications. October 2006. Retrieved 25 June 2014. ^ "همشهری آنلاین". Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. ^ "Int'l congress on Molana opens in Tehran". Archived from the original on 20 December 2007. ^ Iran Daily — Arts & Culture — 10/03/06 Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "News | Chnpress". www.chnpress.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. ^ "Podcast Episode: Living Dialogues: Coleman Barks: The Soul of Rumi (Thought-Leaders in Transforming Ourselves and Our Global Community with Duncan Campbell, Visionary Conversationalist), Living Dialogues.com". personallifemedia.com. ^ "300 dervishes whirl for Rumi in Turkey". Tehran Times. 29 September 2007. ^ "Mawlana Rumi Review". ISSN 2042-3357. ^ a b "archetypebooks.com". Archived from the original on 17 December 2004. ^ Lewisohn, Leonard. "Editor's Note". Mawlana Rumi Review. ^ Rumi, Jalaloddin. "Rumi on fire". translated by Shahriar Shahriari. Retrieved 2 January 2020. Further reading English translations Ma-Aarif-E-Mathnavi A commentary of the Mathnavi of Maulana Jalaluddin Rumi (R.A.), by Hazrat Maulana Hakim Muhammad Akhtar Saheb (D.B.), 1997. The Sufi Path of Love: The Spiritual Teachings of Rumi, by William Chittick, Albany: SUNY Press, 1983. The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love, by Majid M. Naini, Universal Vision & Research, 2002 ISBN 978-0-9714600-0-3 www.naini.net The Mesnevi of Mevlâna Jelālu'd-dīn er-Rūmī. Book first, together with some account of the life and acts of the Author, of his ancestors, and of his descendants, illustrated by a selection of characteristic anecdotes, as collected by their historian, Mevlâna Shemsu'd-dīn Ahmed el-Eflākī el-'Arifī, translated and the poetry versified by James W. Redhouse, London: 1881. Contains the translation of the first book only. Masnaví-i Ma'naví, the Spiritual Couplets of Mauláná Jalálu'd-din Muhammad Rúmí, translated and abridged by E.H. Whinfield, London: 1887; 1989. Abridged version from the complete poem. On-line editions at sacred-texts.com, archive.org and on wikisource. The Masnavī by Jalālu'd-din Rūmī. Book II, translated for the first time from the Persian into prose, with a Commentary, by C.E. Wilson, London: 1910. The Mathnawí of Jalálu'ddín Rúmí, edited from the oldest manuscripts available, with critical notes, translation and commentary by Reynold A. Nicholson, in 8 volumes, London: Messrs Luzac & Co., 1925–1940. Contains the text in Persian. First complete English translation of the Mathnawí. Rending The Veil: Literal and Poetic Translations of Rumi, translated by Shahram Shiva Hohm Press, 1995 ISBN 978-0-934252-46-1. Recipient of Benjamin Franklin Award. Hush, Don't Say Anything to God: Passionate Poems of Rumi, translated by Shahram Shiva Jain Publishing, 1999 ISBN 978-0-87573-084-4. The Essential Rumi, translated by Coleman Barks with John Moyne, A.J. Arberry, Reynold Nicholson, San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1996 ISBN 978-0-06-250959-8; Edison (NJ) and New York: Castle Books, 1997 ISBN 978-0-7858-0871-8. Selections. Description of 2010 expanded edition. A much-cited poem therein is "The Guest House found in, for example, Mark Williams and Danny Penman (2011), Mindfulness, pp. 165–167. The poem is also at The Guest House by Rumi. The Illuminated Rumi, translated by Coleman Barks, Michael Green contributor, New York: Broadway Books, 1997 ISBN 978-0-7679-0002-7. The Masnavi: Book One, translated by Jawid Mojaddedi, Oxford World's Classics Series, Oxford University Press, 2004 ISBN 978-0-19-280438-9. Translated for the first time from the Persian edition prepared by Mohammad Estelami with an introduction and explanatory notes. Awarded the 2004 Lois Roth Prize for excellence in translation of Persian literature by the American Institute of Iranian Studies. Divani Shamsi Tabriz, translated by Nevit Oguz Ergin as Divan-i-kebir, published by Echo Publications, 2003 ISBN 978-1-887991-28-5. The rubais of Rumi: insane with love, translations and commentary by Nevit Oguz Ergin and Will Johnson, Inner Traditions, Rochester, Vermont, 2007, ISBN 978-1-59477-183-5. The Masnavi: Book Two, translated by Jawid Mojaddedi, Oxford World's Classics Series, Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-19-921259-0. The first ever verse translation of the unabridged text of Book Two, with an introduction and explanatory notes. The Rubai'yat of Jalal Al-Din Rumi: Select Translations Into English Verse, Translated by A.J. Arberry, (Emery Walker, London, 1949) Mystical Poems of Rumi, Translated by A.J. Arberry, (University of Chicago Press, 2009) The quatrains of Rumi: Complete translation with Persian text, Islamic mystical commentary, manual of terms, and concordance, translated by Ibrahim W. Gamard and A.G. Rawan Farhadi, 2008. The Soul of Rumi: A New Collection of Ecstatic Poems, translations by Coleman Barks, Harper One, 2002. The Hundred Tales of Wisdom, a translation by Idries Shah of the Manāqib ul-Ārefīn of Aflākī, Octagon Press 1978. Episodes from the life of Rumi and some of his teaching stories. Rumi: 53 Secrets from the Tavern of Love: Poems from the Rubaiyat of Mowlana Rumi, translated by Amin Banani and Anthony A. Lee (White Cloud Press, 2014) ISBN 978-1-940468-00-6. Life and work RUMI, JALĀL-AL-DIN. Encyclopædia Iranica, online edition, 2014. Dr Khalifa Abdul Hakim, "The metaphysics of Rumi: A critical and historical sketch", Lahore: The Institute of Islamic Culture, 1959. ISBN 978-81-7435-475-4 Afzal Iqbal, The Life and thought of Mohammad Jalal-ud-Din Rumi, Lahore: Bazm-i-Iqbal, 1959 (latest edition, The life and work of Jalal-ud-Din Rumi, Kuala Lumpur: The Other Press, 2014). Endorsed by the famous Rumi scholar, A.J. Arberry, who penned the foreword. Abdol Reza Arasteh, Rumi the Persian: Rebirth in Creativity and Love, Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1963 (latest edition, Rumi the Persian, the Sufi, New York: Routledge, 2013). The author was a US-trained Iranian psychiatrist influenced by Erich Fromm and C.G. Jung. Annemarie Schimmel, The Triumphal Sun: A Study of the Works of Jalaloddin Rumi, Albany: SUNY Press, 1993. Fatemeh Keshavarz, "Reading Mystical Lyric: The Case of Jalal al-Din Rumi", University of South Carolina Press, 1998. ISBN 978-1-57003-180-9. Mawlana Rumi Review mawlanarumireview.com. An annual review devoted to Rumi. Archetype, 2010. ISBN 978-1-901383-38-6. Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Islamic Art and Spirituality, Albany: SUNY Press, 1987, chapters 7 and 8. Majid M. Naini, The Mysteries of the Universe and Rumi's Discoveries on the Majestic Path of Love, Universal Vision & Research, 2002, ISBN 978-0-9714600-0-3 Franklin Lewis, Rumi: Past and Present, East and West, Oneworld Publications, 2000. ISBN 978-1-85168-214-0 Lewis, Franklin (2000). Rumi: Past and Present, East and West. One World (UK). ISBN 978-1-85168-214-0. Leslie Wines, Rumi: A Spiritual Biography, New York: Crossroads, 2001 ISBN 978-0-8245-2352-7. Rumi's Thoughts, edited by Seyed G Safavi, London: London Academy of Iranian Studies, 2003. William Chittick, The Sufi Doctrine of Rumi: Illustrated Edition, Bloomington: World Wisdom, 2005. Şefik Can, Fundamentals of Rumi's Thought: A Mevlevi Sufi Perspective, Sommerset (NJ): The Light Inc., 2004 ISBN 978-1-932099-79-9. Rumi's Tasawwuf and Vedanta by R.M. Chopra in Indo Iranica Vol. 60 Athanasios Sideris, "Mevlana Celaleddin Rumi", an entry on Rumi's connections to the Greek element in Asia Minor, in the Encyclopedia of the Hellenic World – Asia Minor, 2003. Waley, Muhammad Isa (2017). The Stanzaic Poems (Tarjī'āt) of Rumi. Critical Edition, Translation, and Commentary, with Additional Chapters on Aspects of His Divan. (School of Oriental and African Studies, London.) Persian literature E.G. Browne, History of Persia, four volumes, first published 1902–1924. Jan Rypka, History of Iranian Literature, Reidel Publishing Company; 1968 OCLC 460598. ISBN 978-90-277-0143-5 "RUMI: His Teachings and Philosophy" by R. M. Chopra, Iran Society, Kolkata (2007). Mozaffari, Ali; Akbar, Ali (2023). "Heritage diplomacy and soft power competition between Iran and Turkey: competing claims over Rumi and Nowruz". International Journal of Cultural Policy: 1–18. doi:10.1080/10286632.2023.2241872. S2CID 261025849. External links Rumi at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Works by Rumi at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Rumi at Internet Archive Works by Rumi at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Rumi at Open Library Dar al Masnavi, several English versions of selections by different translators. Poems by Rumi in English at the Academy of American Poets Masnavi-e Ma'navi, recited in Persian by Mohammad Ghanbar v t e Rumi Works Masnavi Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi Fihi Ma Fihi People Shams Tabrizi Sultan Walad (son) Gurju Khatun (patron) Other Mevlana Museum Mevlevi Order Category Articles related to Rumi v t e Sufism Sufi orders Malamatiyya (Hamdun al-Qassar) Junaydiyya (Al-Junayd) Four Sufi poles Qadiriyya ('Abd al-Qadir al-Gilani) Rifa'iyya (Ahmad al-Rifa'i) Badawiyya (Ahmad al-Badawi) Desuqiyya (Ibrahim al-Desuqi) Naqshbandiyya (Baha' al-Din Naqshband) Chishtiyya (Mu'in al-Din Chishti) Shadhiliyya (Abu al-Hasan al-Shadhili) Darqawiyya (Muhammad al-'Arabi al-Darqawi) Suhrawardiyya (Shihab al-Din 'Umar al-Suhrawardi) Akbariyya (Ibn 'Arabi) Khalwatiyya ('Umar al-Khalwati) Rahmaniyya (Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Rahman al-Azhari) Bayramiyya (Bayram Wali) Ba 'Alawiyya (Muhammad ibn 'Ali Ba 'Alawi) Tijaniyya (Ahmad al-Tijani) Idrisiyya (Ahmad ibn Idris al-Fasi) Practices Dhikr Haḍra Zuhd Ziyarat Mawlid Muraqabah Taqwa Tazkiyah Tawassul Tabarruk Tawakkul Ideas Ihsan Wajd Kashf Karamat Nūr Dhawq Ishq Murid Salik Sufi studies Sufi poetry Sufi philosophy Sufi literature Al-Risala al-Qushayriyya Hilyat al-Awliya' Kashf al-Mahjub The Alchemy of Happiness The Revival of the Religious Sciences Al-Burda Dala'il al-Khayrat Fadha'il al-'Amal Notable Sufis 2nd AH/8th AD Al-Hasan al-Basri (d. 110 AH) Malik ibn Dinar (d. 128 AH) Ibrahim ibn Adham (d. 160 AH) Sufyan al-Thawri (d. 161 AH) Dawud al-Ta'i (d. 165 AH) 'Abd al-Wahid ibn Zaid (d. 177 AH) Rabi'a al-'Adawiyya (d. 180 AH) Ibn al-Mubarak (d. 181 AH) Al-Fudayl ibn 'Iyad (d. 188 AH) Shaqiq al-Balkhi (d. 194 AH) Ma'ruf al-Karkhi (d. 200 AH) 3rd AH/9th AD Al-Darani (d. 205 or 215 AH) Bishr al-Hafi (d. 227 AH) Al-Harith al-Muhasibi (d. 243 AH) Dhul-Nun al-Misri (d. 245 AH) Sari al-Saqati (d. 253 AH) Yahya ibn Mu'adh al-Razi (d. 258 AH) Abu Sa'id al-Kharraz (d. 277 or 286 AH) Sahl al-Tustari (d. 283 AH) Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi (d. 295 or 320 AH) Abu al-Husain al-Nuri (d. 295 AH) 4th AH/10th AD Ruwaym (d. 303 AH) Abu Bakr al-Shibli (d. 334 AH) Abu Talib al-Makki (d. 386 AH) Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi (d. 380 AH) Sufi leaders Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (d. 589 AH) Muzaffar al-Din Gökböri (d. 630 AH) Muhammad al-Fateh (d. 886 AH) Aurangzeb (d. 1118 AH) Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (d. 1277 AH) Bahadur Shah Zafar (d. 1278 AH) Imam Shamil (d. 1287 AH) Emir Abdel-Kader (d. 1300 AH) Muhammad Ahmad (d. 1302/1885) Omar al-Mukhtar (d. 1350 AH) 'Izz al-Din al-Qassam (d. 1354 AH) Portal v t e Muslim scholars of the Hanafi school by century (AH CE) 2nd/8th Abu Hanifa (founder of the school; 699–767) Abu Yusuf (738–798) Ibn al-Mubarak (726–797) Muhammad al-Shaybani (749–805) Yahya ibn Ma'in (774–807) Waki' ibn al-Jarrah (d. 812) 3rd/9th Isa ibn Aban (d. 836) Ahmad ibn Abi Du'ad (777–854) Yahya ibn Aktham (d. 857) Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi (d. 869) Al-Ḫaṣṣāf (d. 874) Abu Bakr al-Samarqandi (d. 882) 4th/10th Al-Tahawi (843–933) Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (853–944) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi (b. 874) Al-Jassas (917–981) Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (944–983) 5th/11th Abu al-Husayn al-Basri (d. 1044) Ali Hujwiri (1009–1072) Al-Bazdawi (1010–1089) Al-Sarakhsi (d. 1090) Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (1030–1100) Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi (d. 1115) 6th/12th Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari (d. 1139) Ibn al-Malāḥimī (d. 1141) Yusuf Hamadani (1062–1141) Abu Hafs Umar al-Nasafi (1067–1142) Al-Zamakhshari (1074–1143) Siraj al-Din al-Ushi (d. 1180) Nur al-Din al-Sabuni (d. 1184) Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi (d. 1197) Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani (1135–1197) 7th/13th Rumi (1207–1273) Jalaluddin Tabrizi (d. 1228) Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki (1173–1235) Mu'in al-Din Chishti (1143–1236) Fariduddin Ganjshakar (1173–1266) Abu Tawwama (d. 1300) Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi (d. 1310) 8th/14th Nizamuddin Auliya (1238–1325) Uthman bin Ali Zayla'i (d. 1342) Shah Jalal Mujarrad (1271–1346) Uthman Siraj ad-Din (1258–1357) Ala al-Haq (1301–1384) Jahaniyan Jahangasht (1308–1384) Akmal al-Din al-Babarti (d. 1384) Al-Taftazani (1322–1390) Ibn Abi al-Izz (1331–1390) Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi (1350–1410) Al-Sharif al-Jurjani (1339–1414) 9th/15th Nur Qutb Alam (d. 1416) Shams al-Din al-Fanari (1350–1431) 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari (1377–1438) Husam ad-Din Manikpuri (d. 1449) Badr al-Din al-Ayni (1361–1451) Al-Kamal ibn al-Humam (1388–1457) Ali Qushji (1403–1474) Khidr Bey (b. 1407) 10th/16th Ibn Kemal (1468–1536) Abdul Quddus Gangohi (1456–1537) Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī (1460–1549) Ali Sher Bengali (d. 1570s) Usman Bengali (d. 1573) Muhammad Birgivi (1522–1573) Ebussuud Efendi (1490–1574) Ali al-Qari (d. 1606) 11th/17th Ahmad Sirhindi (1564–1624) 'Abd al-Haqq al-Dehlawi (1551–1642) Kâtip Çelebi (1609–1657) Shihab al-Din al-Khafaji (1569–1659) Khayr al-Din al-Ramli (1585–1671) Syed Rafi Mohammad (d. 1679) Mir Zahid Harawi (d. 1689) Syed Inayatullah (d. 1713) 12th/18th Shah Abdur Rahim (1644–1719) Syed Hayatullah (d. 1722) Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi (1641–1731) Syed Mohammad Zaman (d. 1756) Hashim Thattvi (1692–1761) Shah Waliullah Dehlawi (1703–1762) Shah Nuri Bengali (d. 1785) Fakhr ad-Din al-Burdwani (d. 1785) Ghulam Mustafa Burdwani (fl. 1780s) Mirza Mazhar Jan-e-Janaan (1699–1781) Murtada al-Zabidi (1732–1790) Sanaullah Panipati (1730–1810) Mawlana Murad (fl. 1790s) Syed Mohammad Rafi (d. 1803) Majduddin (d. 1813) 13th/19th Ghulam Ali Dehlavi (1743–1824) Shah Abdul Aziz (1746–1824) Syed Ahmad Barelvi (1786–1831) Syed Mir Nisar Ali (1782–1831) Ibn Abidin (1784–1836) Haji Shariatullah (1781–1840) Shah Muhammad Ishaq (1783–1846) Mamluk Ali Nanautawi (1789–1851) Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (1796–1861) Dudu Miyan (1819–1862) Karamat Ali Jaunpuri (1800–1873) Al-Maydani (1807–1861) Haji Dost Muhammad Qandhari (1801–1868) Yusuf Ma Dexin (1794–1874) Naqi Ali Khan (1830–1880) Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi (1832–1880) Ahmad Ali Saharanpuri (1810–1880) Yaqub Nanautawi (1833–1884) Mazhar Nanautawi (1821–1885) Abd al-Hayy al-Lucknawi (1848–1886) Rafiuddin Deobandi (1836–1890) Rahmatullah Kairanawi (1818–1891) Imdadullah Muhajir Makki (1817–1899) Hafiz Ahmad Jaunpuri (1834–1899) Rashid Ahmad Gangohi (1826–1905) Abdul Wahid Bengali (1850–1905) Syed Ahmadullah Maizbhandari (1826–1906) Fazlur Rahman Usmani (1831–1907) Abd Allah ibn Abbas ibn Siddiq (1854–1907) Muhammad Naimuddin (1832–1907) Hassan Raza Khan (1859–1908) Sayyid Muhammad Abid (1834–1912) Ahmad Hasan Amrohi (1850–1912) Shibli Nomani (1857–1914) Najib Ali Choudhury (fl. 1870s) 14th/20th Imamuddin Punjabi (died 1916) Abdul Hamid Madarshahi (1869–1920) Mahmud Hasan Deobandi (1851–1920) Abdul Awwal Jaunpuri (1867–1921) Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi (1856–1921) Azimuddin Hanafi (1838–1922) Sufi Azizur Rahman (1862–1922) Muhammad Ali Mungeri (1846–1927) Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri (1852–1927) Muhammad Amjad (d. 1927) Azizur Rahman Usmani (1859–1928) Hamiduddin Farahi (1863–1930) Muhammad Ahmad Nanautawi (1862–1930) Ibrahim Ali Tashna (1872–1931) Anwar Shah Kashmiri (1875–1933) Abdur Rab Jaunpuri (1875–1935) Majid Ali Jaunpuri (d. 1935) Meher Ali Shah (1859–1937) Ghulamur Rahman Maizbhandari (1865–1937) Muhammad Ishaq (1883–1938) Mohammad Abu Bakr Siddique (1845–1939) Shukrullah Mubarakpuri (1895–1942) Ashraf Ali Thanwi (1863–1943) Ibrahim Ujani (1863–1943) Habibullah Qurayshi (1865–1943) Hamid Raza Khan (1875–1943) Ilyas Kandhlawi (1885–1944) Asghar Hussain Deobandi (1877–1945) Sahool Bhagalpuri (d. 1948) Amjad Ali Aazmi (1882–1948) Naeem-ud-Deen Muradabadi (1887–1948) Abd Allah Siraj (1876–1949) Shabbir Ahmad Usmani (1887–1949) Jamaat Ali Shah (1834–1951) Khwaja Yunus Ali (1886–1951) Nesaruddin Ahmad (1873–1952) Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari (1879–1952) Shihabuddeen Ahmed Koya Shaliyathi (1885–1954) Izaz Ali Amrohi (1882–1955) Manazir Ahsan Gilani (1892–1956) Hussain Ahmed Madani (1879–1957) Ahmed Ali Enayetpuri (1898–1959) Amin ul-Hasanat (1922–1960) Azizul Haq (1903–1961) Maqsudullah (1883–1961) Abdul Qadir Raipuri (1878–1962) Ahmed Ali Lahori (1887–1962) Hifzur Rahman Seoharwi (1900–1962) Sardar Ahmad Chishti (1903–1962) Yusuf Kandhlawi (1917–1965) Ibrahim Raza Khan (1907–1965) Shah Ahmad Hasan (1882–1967) Shamsul Haque Faridpuri (1896–1969) Khair Muhammad Jalandhari (1895–1970) Abdul Hamid Qadri Badayuni (1898–1970) Mohammad Abdul Ghafoor Hazarvi (1909–1970) Muhammad Ali Jalandhari (1895–1971) Mushahid Ahmad Bayampuri (1907–1971) Abdur Rahman Kashgari (1912–1971) Syed Fakhruddin Ahmad (1889–1972) Abdul Batin Jaunpuri (1900–1973) Momtazuddin Ahmad (1889–1974) Muhammad Abu Zahra (1898–1974) Fazlur Rahman Ansari (1914–1974) Deen Muhammad Khan (1900–1974) Amimul Ehsan Barkati (1911–1974) Zafar Ahmad Usmani (1892–1974) Abul Wafa Al Afghani (1893–1975) Muhammad Miyan Deobandi (1903–1975) Muhammad Faizullah (1892–1976) Abdul Wahhab Pirji (1895–1976) Athar Ali Bengali (1891–1976) Muhammad Shafi Deobandi (1897–1976) Abdul Aziz Muradabadi (1894–1976) Yusuf Banuri (1908–1977) Syed Muhammad Ishaq (1915–1977) Ahmed Ali Badarpuri (1915–2000) Mehboob Rizwi (1911–1979) Abul A'la Maududi (1903–1979) Mufti Mehmood (1919–1980) Mustafa Raza Khan (1892–1981) Shah Abd al-Wahhab (1894–1982) Zakariyya Kandhlawi (1898–1982) Muslehuddin Siddiqui (1918–1983) Tayyib Qasmi (1897–1983) Shamsul Haq Afghani (1901–1983) Ibrahim Chatuli (1894–1984) Atiqur Rahman Usmani (1901–1984) Faiz-ul Hassan Shah (1911–1984) Shafee Okarvi (1930–1984) Saeed Ahmad Akbarabadi (1908–1985) Azhar Shah Qaiser (1920–1985) Harun Babunagari (1902–1986) Ahmad Saeed Kazmi (1913–1986) Abdur Rashid Tarkabagish (1900–1986) Abdur Rahim Firozpuri (1918–1987) Muhammadullah Hafezzi (1895–1987) Shamsul Huda Panchbagi (1897–1988) Abdul Haq Akorwi (1912–1988) Abdul Jalil Choudhury (1925–1989) Muntakhib al-Haqq (fl. 1980s) Abu Zafar Mohammad Saleh (1915–1990) Abdul Matin Chowdhury (1915–1990) Sayed Moazzem Hossain (1901–1991) Minnatullah Rahmani (1913–1991) Taqi Amini (1926–1991) Habib al-Rahman al-A'zami (1900–1992) Muhammad Yunus (1906–1992) Hamid al-Ansari Ghazi (1909–1992) Masihullah Khan (1912–1992) Syed Shujaat Ali Qadri (1941–1993) Abul Hasan Jashori (1918–1993) Waqaruddin Qadri (1915–1993) Abdul Wahab Siddiqi (1942–1994) Ayub Ali (1919–1995) Inamul Hasan Kandhlawi (1918–1995) Mukhtar Ashraf (1916–1996) Abdul Haque Faridi (1903–1996) Mahmood Hasan Gangohi (1907–1996) Athar Mubarakpuri (1916–1996) Shamsuddin Qasemi (1935–1996) Manzoor Nomani (1905–1997) Shamsul-hasan Shams Barelvi (1917–1997) Sultan Ahmad Nanupuri (1914–1997) Amin Ahsan Islahi (1904–1997) Karam Shah al-Azhari (1918–1998) Abul Hasan Ali Hasani Nadwi (1913–1999) Rashid Ahmed Jaunpuri (1889–2001) Arshadul Qadri (1925–2002) Shah Ahmad Noorani (1926–2003) Nur Uddin Gohorpuri (1924–2005) Ashraf Ali Bishwanathi (1928–2005) Kafilur Rahman Nishat Usmani (1942–2006) Syed Fazlul Karim (1935–2006) Abrarul Haq Haqqi (1920–2006) Ubaidul Haq (1928–2007) Anzar Shah Kashmiri (1927–2008) Obaidul Haque Wazirpuri (1934–2008) Abdul Latif Chowdhury Fultali (1913–2008) Muhammad Abdullah (1932–2008) Sarfraz Ahmed Naeemi (1948–2009) Naseeruddin Naseer Gilani (1949–2009) 15th/21st Israr Ahmed (1932–2010) Marghubur Rahman (1914–2010) Abu Saeed Muhammad Omar Ali (1945–2010) Zafeeruddin Miftahi (1926–2011) Azizul Haque (1919–2012) Abdus Sattar Akon (1929–2012) Shah Saeed Ahmed Raipuri (1926–2012) Fazlul Haque Amini (1945–2012) Muhammad Fazal Karim (1954–2013) Qazi Mu'tasim Billah (1933–2013) Zubair ul Hassan Kandhlawi (1950–2014) Nurul Islam Farooqi (1959–2014) Asad Muhammad Saeed as-Sagharji (d. 2015) Abdur Rahman Chatgami (1920–2015) Abdullah Quraishi Al-Azhari (1935–2015) Muhiuddin Khan (1935–2016) Abdul Jabbar Jahanabadi (1937–2016) Saleemullah Khan (1921–2017) Yunus Jaunpuri (1937–2017) Muhammad Abdul Wahhab (1923–2018) Salim Qasmi (1926–2018) Akhtar Raza Khan (1943–2018) Iftikhar-ul-Hasan Kandhlawi (1922–2019) Yusuf Motala (1946–2019) Ghulam Nabi Kashmiri (1965–2019) Khalid Mahmud (judge) (1925–2020) Tafazzul Haque Habiganji (1938–2020) Muhammad Abdus Sobhan (1936–2020) Abdul Momin Imambari (1930–2020) Saeed Ahmad Palanpuri (1940–2020) Salman Mazahiri (1946–2020) Shah Ahmad Shafi (1945–2020) Adil Khan (1957–2020) Khadim Hussain Rizvi (1966–2020) Nur Hossain Kasemi (1945–2020) Azizur Rahman Hazarvi (1948–2020) Nizamuddin Asir Adrawi (1926–2021) Muhammad Ali al-Sabuni (1930–2021) Muhammad Wakkas (1952–2021) Noor Alam Khalil Amini (1952–2021) Usman Mansoorpuri (1944–2021) Junaid Babunagari (1953–2021) Wali Rahmani (1943–2021) Ebrahim Desai (1963–2021) Abdus Salam Chatgami (1943–2021) Nurul Islam Jihadi (1916–2021) Faizul Waheed (1964–2021) Abdul Halim Bukhari (1945–2022) Rafi Usmani (1936–2022) Delwar Hossain Sayeedi (1940–2023) Shahidul Islam (1960–2023) Living Saifur Rahman Nizami (b. 1916) Ghulam Rasool Jamaati (b. 1923) Syed Waheed Ashraf (b. 1933) Syed Abdul Qadir Jilani (b. 1935) Muhibbullah Babunagari (b. 1935) Ziaul Mustafa Razvi Qadri (b. 1935) Abdul Qadir Pakistani (b. 1935) Yusuf Ziya Kavakçı (b. 1938) Madni Miyan (b. 1938) Sultan Zauq Nadvi (b. 1939) Zia Uddin (b. 1941) Taqi Usmani (b. 1943) Kamaluddin Zafree (b. 1945) Muneeb-ur-Rehman (b. 1945) Qamaruzzaman Azmi (b. 1946) Abul Qasim Nomani (b. 1947) Idrees Dahiri (b. 1947) Farid Uddin Chowdhury (b. 1947) Farid Uddin Masood (b. 1950) Mahmudul Hasan (b. 1950) Mukhtaruddin Shah (b. 1950) Ilyas Qadri (b. 1950) Tahir-ul-Qadri (b. 1951) Yaseen Akhtar Misbahi (b. 1953) Tariq Jamil (b. 1953) Sufyan Qasmi (b. 1954) Nurul Islam Walipuri (b. 1955) Ameen Mian Qaudri (b. 1955) Abu Taher Misbah (b. 1956) Kaukab Noorani Okarvi (b. 1957) Hamid Saeed Kazmi (b. 1957) Rahmatullah Mir Qasmi (b. 1957) AFM Khalid Hossain (b. 1959) Najibul Bashar Maizbhandari (b. 1959) Shakir Ali Noori (b. 1960) Ruhul Amin (b. 1962) Mizanur Rahman Sayed (b. 1963) Sajidur Rahman (b. 1964) Ibrahim Mogra (b. 1965) Saad Kandhlawi (b. 1965) Faiz-ul-Aqtab Siddiqi (b. 1967) Arshad Misbahi (b. 1968) Abu Reza Nadwi (b. 1968) Muhammad Abdul Malek (b. 1969) Mahfuzul Haque (b. 1969) Ilyas Ghuman (b. 1969) Qasim Rashid Ahmad (b. 1970) Asjad Raza Khan (b. 1970) Syed Rezaul Karim (b. 1971) Riyadh ul Haq (b. 1971) Obaidullah Hamzah (b. 1972) Raza Saqib Mustafai (b. 1972) Manzoor Mengal (b. 1973) Syed Faizul Karim (b. 1973) Mamunul Haque (b. 1973) Abdur Rahman Mangera (b. 1974) Faraz Rabbani (b. 1974) Adnan Kakakhail (b. 1975) Mahmudul Hasan Azhari (b. 1976) Muhammad al-Kawthari (b. 1976) Amer Jamil (b. 1977) Yasir Nadeem al Wajidi (b. 1982) Shahinur Pasha Chowdhury (b. 1985) Abbas Siddiqui (b. 1987) Kaif Raza Khan (b. 2001) Ghulam Mohammad Vastanvi Tauqeer Raza Khan Subhan Raza Khan Abdul Malek Halim Izharul Islam Chowdhury Amjad M. Mohammed Mukarram Ahmad Scholars of other Sunni Islamic schools of jurisprudence Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Maturidi school of Sunni theology Maturidi scholars 3rd AH/9th AD Abu Bakr al-Samarqandi (d. 268 AH) Abu Mansur al-Maturidi (d. 333 AH) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi (d. 342 AH) Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi (d. 379 AH) Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (d. 396 AH) 4th AH/10th AD Abu Zayd al-Dabusi (d. 429 AH) Ali Hujwiri (d. 464 AH) Yūsuf Balasaguni (d. 469 AH) Fakhr al-Islam al-Bazdawi (d. 482 AH) Al-Sarakhsi (d. 483 AH) Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi (d. 493 AH) 5th AH/11th AD Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi (d. 508 AH) Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari (d. 534 AH) Yusuf Hamadani (d. 535 AH) Sheikh Ahmad-e Jami (d. 536 AH) Abu Hafs Umar al-Nasafi (d. 537 AH) Ahmad Yasawi (d. 561 AH) Nur al-Din Zengi (d. 569 AH) Siraj al-Din al-Ushi (d. 575 AH) Nur al-Din al-Sabuni (d. 580 AH) Fatima al-Samarqandi (d. 581 AH) Al-Kasani (d. 587 AH) Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi (d. 593 AH) 6th AH/12th AD Abu al-Thana' al-Lamishi (d. beginning of the 6th century AH) Al-Mu'azzam 'Isa (d. 624 AH) Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki (d. 632 AH) Mu'in al-Din Chishti (d. 633 AH) Saif ed-Din al-Boharsi (d. 659 AH) Fariduddin Ganjshakar (d. 664 AH) Rumi (d. 671 AH) Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi (d. after 690 AH) 7th AH/13th AD Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi (d. 710 AH) Sultan Walad (d. 711 AH) Nizamuddin Auliya (d. 725 AH) Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar (d. 747 AH) Akmal al-Din al-Babarti (d. 786 AH) Baha' al-Din Naqshband (d. 791 AH) Kadi Burhan al-Din (d. 800 AH) 8th AH/14th AD Bande Nawaz (d. 825 AH) Shams al-Din al-Fanari (d. 834 AH) 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari (d. 841 AH) Yaqub al-Charkhi (d. 851 AH) Ahmad ibn Arabshah (d. 861 AH) Badr al-Din al-'Ayni (d. 855 AH) Al-Kamal ibn al-Humam (d. 861 AH) Khidr Bey (d. 863 AH) Ali al-Bistami (d. 874 AH) 'Ali al-Qushji (d. 879 AH) Mehmed II (d. 886 AH) Khwaja Ahrar (d. 895 AH) 9th AH/15th AD Ali-Shir Nava'i (d. 906 AH) Husayn Kashifi (d. 910 AH) Ibn Kemal (d. 940 AH) Abdul Quddus Gangohi (d. 943 AH) Ibrāhīm al-Ḥalabī (d. 955 AH) Taşköprüzade (d. 968 AH) Muhammad Birgivi (d. 980 AH) Ebussuud Efendi (d. 982 AH) 10th AH/16th AD Khwaja Baqi Billah (d. 1011 AH) 'Ali al-Qari (d. 1014 AH) Hasan Kafi al-Aqhisari (d. 1025 AH) Ahmad Sirhindi (d. 1034 AH) Mahmud Hudayi (d. 1037 AH) 'Abd al-Haqq al-Dehlawi (d. 1052 AH) Mulla Mahmud Jaunpuri (d. 1061 AH) 'Abd al-Hakim al-Siyalkoti (d. 1067 AH) Wang Daiyu (d. around 1068 AH) Kâtip Çelebi (d. 1068 AH) Shihab al-Din al-Khafaji (d. 1069 AH) Khayr al-Din al-Ramli (d. 1081 AH) 11th AH/17th AD Aurangzeb (d. 1118 AH) Ma Zhu (d. around 1123 AH) Ismail Haqqi Bursevi (d. 1127 AH) Shah Abdur Rahim (d. 1131 AH) Liu Zhi of Nanjing (d. 1158 AH, or 1178 AH) Nizamuddin Sihalivi (d. 1161 AH) Makhdoom Muhammad Hashim Thattvi (d. 1174 AH) Shah Waliullah Dehlawi (d. 1176 AH) 'Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi (d. 1176 AH) İbrahim Hakkı Erzurumi (d. 1193 AH) Mirza Mazhar Jan-e-Janaan (d. 1195 AH) 12th AH/18th AD Gelenbevi Ismail Efendi (d. 1204 AH) Murtada al-Zabidi (d. 1205 AH) Sanaullah Panipati (d. 1225 AH) Ghabdennasir Qursawi (d. 1226 AH) Ghulam Ali Dehlavi (d. 1239 AH) Shah Abdul Aziz (d. 1239 AH) Shah Ismail Dehlvi (d. 1246 AH) Syed Ahmad Barelvi (d. 1246 AH) Ibn 'Abidin (d. 1252 AH) Muhammad 'Abid al-Sindi (d. 1257 AH) Mamluk Ali Nanautawi (d. 1267 AH) Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (d. 1278 AH) Yusuf Ma Dexin (d. 1291 AH) Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi (d. 1297 AH) Naqi Ali Khan (d. 1297 AH) 'Abd al-Ghani al-Maydani (d. 1298 AH) 13th AH/19th AD 'Abd al-Hayy al-Lucknawi (d. 1304 AH) Shihab al-Din al-Marjani (d. 1306 AH) Rahmatullah al-Kairanawi (d. 1308 AH) Giritli Sırrı Pasha (d. 1312 AH) Ahmed Cevdet Pasha (d. 1312 AH) Imdadullah Muhajir Makki (d. 1317 AH) Abai Qunanbaiuly (d. 1321 AH) Rashid Ahmad Gangohi (d. 1323 AH) Ahmad Hasan Amrohi (d. 1330 AH) Muhammad Anwaarullah Farooqui (d. 1335 AH) Mahmud Hasan Deobandi (d. 1338 AH) Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi (d. 1340 AH) Shakarim Qudayberdiuli (d. 1344 AH) Muhammad Ali Mungeri (d. 1346 AH) Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri (d. 1346 AH) Anwar Shah Kashmiri (d. 1352 AH) Muhammad Bakhit al-Muti'i (d. 1354 AH) Fatma Aliye Topuz (d. 1354 AH) Meher Ali Shah (d. 1356 AH) Muhammed Hamdi Yazır (d. 1361 AH) Ashraf Ali Thanwi (d. 1361 AH) Ubaidullah Sindhi (d. 1364 AH) Shabbir Ahmad Usmani (d. 1368 AH) Musa Bigiev (d. 1368 AH) Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari (d. 1371 AH) Kifayatullah Dehlawi (d. 1371 AH) Mustafa Sabri (d. 1373 AH) Husayn Ahmad al-Madani (d. 1377 AH) Süleyman Hilmi Tunahan (d. 1378 AH) Ömer Nasuhi Bilmen (d. 1391 AH) Muhammad Abu Zahra (d. 1394 AH) Muhammad Shafi' Deobandi (d. 1395 AH) Abul Wafa Al Afghani (d. 1395 AH) Abdul Majid Daryabadi (d. 1397 AH) 14th AH/20th AD Muhammad Zakariyya al-Kandhlawi (d. 1402 AH) Muhammad Tayyib Qasmi (d. 1403 AH) Abdul Haq Akorwi (d. 1409 AH) Habib al-Rahman al-'Azmi (d. 1412 AH) Muhammad Ayyub Ali (d. 1415 AH) Anzar Shah Kashmiri (d. 1428 AH) Wahbah al-Zuhayli (d. 1436 AH) Muhammad Salim Qasmi (d. 1439 AH) Saeed Ahmad Palanpuri (d. 1441 AH) Muhammad Ali al-Sabuni (d. 1442 AH) Nur Hossain Kasemi (d. 1442 AH) Usmankhan Alimov (d. 1443 AH) Muhammad Rafi' Usmani Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri Muhammad Taqi Usmani Husein Kavazović Salah Mezhiev Theology books Al-Fiqh al-Akbar Kitab al-Tawhid Tafsir al-Maturidi Al-'Aqida al-Tahawiyya Al-Sawad al-A'zam Tabsirat al-Adilla 'Aqa'id al-Nasafi Talkhis al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Han Kitab Qingzhen Zhinan Kutadgu Bilig Tafsir al-Mazhari Izhar ul-Haqq Al-Muhannad ala al-Mufannad Hak Dīni Kur'an Dili See also 2016 international conference on Sunni Islam in Grozny 2020 International Maturidi Conference Ahl al-Ra'y Kalam Tawhid Gedimu Firangi Mahal Deobandi Barelvi Maturidi-related templates Hanafi Ash'ari Sufi Islamic theology v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism (al-Ash'ari) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit (Hanafiyah) Malik ibn Anas (Maliki) Al-Shafi'i (Shafi‘i) Maturidism (Al-Maturidi) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Muhammad Zakariya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al-Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al-Juzjanī al-Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram (Karramiyya) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad-Dimashqī an-Nabati al-Qībtī (Murjī-Qadariyah) Mu'tazila (Wasil ibn 'Ata') Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Bin Baz Ibn al-Uthaymeen Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Shia-Imamiyyah (Wilayat al-faqih) Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kadhim Ali al-Ridha Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Shia-Ismailiyyah (Ibn Maymūn) Ibn Ismāʿīl Maymūn al-Qaddāḥ's Ismā'īlī doctrine Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Arwa al-Sulayhi Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Nizārī Ismāʿīlī doctrine Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Rasa'il al-Hikma of Druze Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Ahl us- Sunnah wa’l- Jama’ah Ahl al-Hadith (Atharism) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Ibn al Uthaymeen Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y (Ilm al-Kalam) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Necmettin Erbakan – Millî Görüş Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudi Batriyya Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rawendis Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdiists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima (Arbitration) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al-Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al-Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah (Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al-Fārisī ad-Dimashqī Kalandars Bārāq Bābā Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah (Ma'bad al-Juhani) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Rifa`i / Galibi Order Muʿtazila (Rationalism) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato Tolu-e-Islam Muhammad Iqbal Ghulam Ahmed Pervez United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad's doctrine Nur movement Said Nursî / Fethullah Gülen – Hizmet Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Ṭarīqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence: Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Jurisprudence Index Legal theory Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Marx Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Walzer Weber Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Persian literature Old Behistun Inscription Old Persian inscriptions Ganjnameh Inscription of Xerxes the Great in Van Fortress Achaemenid inscription in the Kharg Island Middle Ayadgar-i Zariran Counsels of Adurbad-e Mahrspandan Dēnkard Book of Jamasp Book of Arda Viraf Karnamak-i Artaxshir-i Papakan Cube of Zoroaster Dana-i Menog Khrat Shabuhragan of Mani Shahrestanha-ye Eranshahr Bundahishn Menog-i Khrad Jamasp Namag Dadestan-i Denig Anthology of Zadspram Warshtmansr Zand-i Wahman yasn Drakht-i Asurig Shikand-gumanig Vizar Classical 800s Muhammad ibn Wasif 900s Rudaki Daqiqi Ferdowsi (Shahnameh) Abu Shakur Balkhi Abu Tahir Khosrovani Shahid Balkhi Bal'ami Rabia Balkhi Abusaeid Abolkheir (967–1049) Avicenna (980–1037) Unsuri Asjadi Kisai Marvazi Ayyuqi 1000s Bābā Tāher Nasir Khusraw (1004–1088) Al-Ghazali (1058–1111) Khwaja Abdullah Ansari (1006–1088) Asadi Tusi Qatran Tabrizi (1009–1072) Nizam al-Mulk (1018–1092) Masud Sa'd Salman (1046–1121) Omar Khayyam (1048–1131) Fakhruddin As'ad Gurgani Ahmad Ghazali Hujwiri Manuchehri Ayn-al-Quzat Hamadani (1098–1131) Uthman Mukhtari Abu-al-Faraj Runi Sanai Banu Goshasp Borzu-Nama Afdal al-Din Kashani Abu'l Hasan Mihyar al-Daylami Mu'izzi Mahsati Ganjavi 1100s Iranshah Suzani Samarqandi Hassan Ghaznavi Faramarz Nama Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155–1191) Adib Sabir Falaki Shirvani Am'aq Najm al-Din Razi Attar (1142–c.1220) Khaqani (1120–1190) Anvari (1126–1189) Faramarz-e Khodadad Nizami Ganjavi (1141–1209) Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149–1209) Kamal al-Din Esfahani Shams Tabrizi (d.1248) 1200s Abu Tahir Tarsusi Awhadi Maraghai Shams al-Din Qays Razi Sultan Walad Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī Afdal al-Din Kashani Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi Mahmud Shabistari (1288–1320s) Abu'l Majd Tabrizi Amir Khusrau (1253–1325) Saadi (Bustan / Golestān) Bahram-e-Pazhdo Pur-Baha Jami Zartosht Bahram e Pazhdo Rumi Homam Tabrizi (1238–1314) Nozhat al-Majales Khwaju Kermani Badr Shirvani Zu'l-Fiqar Shirvani 1300s Ibn Yamin Shah Ni'matullah Wali Hafez Abu Ali Qalandar Fazlallah Astarabadi Nasimi Emad al-Din Faqih Kermani 1400s Ubayd Zakani Salman Savaji Hatefi Jami Kamal Khujandi Ahli Shirazi (1454–1535) Fuzuli (1483–1556) Ismail I (1487–1524) Baba Faghani 1500s Vahshi Bafqi (1523–1583) Muhtasham Kashani (1500–1588) 'Orfi Shirazi 1600s Taleb Amoli Saib Tabrizi (1607–1670) Asir-e Esfahani (c. 1620–1648) Kalim Kashani Hazin Lāhiji (1692–1766) Saba Kashani Abdul-Qādir Bēdil (1642–1720) Naw'i Khabushani Mohammad Qoli Salim Tehrani Rasa Salim Tehrani 1700s Hatef Esfahani Azar Bigdeli (1722–1781) Neshat Esfahani Abbas Foroughi Bastami (1798–1857) 1800s Mirza Ghalib (1797–1869) Zayn al-Abidin Shirvani (1779–1837) Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat (1800–1871) Mirza Mohammad Taqi Sepehr (1801–1880) Qaani (1808–1854) Mahmud Saba Kashani (1813–1893) Contemporary Poetry Iran Ahmadreza Ahmadi Mehdi Akhavan-Sales Hormoz Alipour Qeysar Aminpour Mohammad Reza Aslani Aref Qazvini Ahmad NikTalab Aminollah Rezaei Manouchehr Atashi Mahmoud Mosharraf Azad Tehrani Mohammad-Taqi Bahar Reza Baraheni Simin Behbahani Dehkhoda Hushang Ebtehaj Bijan Elahi Parviz Eslampour Parvin E'tesami Forugh Farrokhzad Hossein Monzavi Hushang Irani Iraj Mirza Bijan Jalali Siavash Kasraie Esmail Khoi Shams Langeroodi Mohammad Mokhtari Nosrat Rahmani Yadollah Royaee Tahereh Saffarzadeh Sohrab Sepehri Mohammad-Reza Shafiei Kadkani Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar Ahmad Shamlou Manouchehr Sheybani Nima Yooshij (She'r-e Nimaa'i) Fereydoon Moshiri Armenia Edward Haghverdian Afghanistan Nadia Anjuman Wasef Bakhtari Raziq Faani Khalilullah Khalili Youssof Kohzad Massoud Nawabi Abdul Ali Mustaghni Tajikistan Sadriddin Ayni Farzona Iskandar Khatloni Abolqasem Lahouti Gulrukhsor Safieva Loiq Sher-Ali Payrav Sulaymoni Mirzo Tursunzoda Satim Ulugzade Uzbekistan Asad Gulzoda Pakistan Muhammad Iqbal Novels Ali Mohammad Afghani Ghazaleh Alizadeh Bozorg Alavi Reza Amirkhani Mahshid Amirshahi Ghassem Hashemi Nezhad Reza Baraheni Simin Daneshvar Mahmoud Dowlatabadi Soudabeh Fazaeli Reza Ghassemi Mohammad Hanif (Iranian writer) Houshang Golshiri Aboutorab Khosravi Zeyn al-Abedin Maraghei Ahmad Mahmoud Shahriyar Mandanipour Abbas Maroufi Mansour Koushan Iraj Pezeshkzad Short stories Jalal Al-e-Ahmad Shamim Bahar Sadeq Chubak Abolhassan Etessami Javad Mojabi Simin Daneshvar Nader Ebrahimi Ebrahim Golestan Houshang Golshiri Sadegh Hedayat Mohammad-Ali Jamalzadeh Aboutorab Khosravi Mostafa Mastoor Jaafar Modarres-Sadeghi Houshang Moradi Kermani Bijan Najdi Shahrnush Parsipur Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Bahram Sadeghi Goli Taraqqi Plays Reza Abdoh Mirza Fatali Akhundzadeh Mohsen Yalfani Bahram Beyzai Bahman Forsi Amir Reza Koohestani Alireza Koushk Jalali Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Bijan Mofid Hengameh Mofid Abbas Nalbandian Akbar Radi Pari Saberi Mirza Aqa Tabrizi Mohammad Yaghoubi Screenplays Saeed Aghighi Mohammad Reza Aslani Rakhshan Bani-E'temad Bahram Beyzai Hajir Darioush Pouran Derakhshandeh Asghar Farhadi Bahman Farmanara Farrokh Ghaffari Behrouz Gharibpour Bahman Ghobadi Fereydun Gole Ebrahim Golestan Ali Hatami Abolfazl Jalili Ebrahim Hatamikia Abdolreza Kahani Varuzh Karim-Masihi Samuel Khachikian Abbas Kiarostami Majid Majidi Mohsen Makhmalbaf Dariush Mehrjui Reza Mirkarimi Rasoul Mollagholipour Amir Naderi Jafar Panahi Kambuzia Partovi Fereydoun Rahnema Rasul Sadr Ameli Mohammad Sadri Parviz Shahbazi Sohrab Shahid-Saless Translators Amrollah Abjadian Jaleh Amouzgar Najaf Daryabandari Mohammad Ghazi Lili Golestan Sadegh Hedayat Ramak NikTalab Saleh Hosseini Ahmad Kamyabi Mask Ahmad Shamlou Mohammad Moin Ebrahim Pourdavoud Hamid Samandarian Jalal Sattari Jafar Shahidi Ahmad Tafazzoli Abbas Zaryab Children's literature Samad Behrangi Houshang Moradi Kermani Babak NikTalab Hengameh Mofid Poopak NikTalab Farhad Hasanzadeh Ramak NikTalab Essayists Aydin Aghdashloo Ali Latifiyan Mohammad Ebrahim Bastani Parizi Ehsan Yarshater Ahmad Kasravi Contemporary Persian and Classical Persian are the same language, but writers since 1900 are classified as contemporary. At one time, Persian was a common cultural language of much of the non-Arabic Islamic world. Today it is the official language of Iran, Tajikistan and one of the two official languages of Afghanistan. v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF National Norway Chile Spain France BnF data Catalonia Germany Italy Israel Finland United States Sweden Latvia Japan Czech Republic Australia Greece Korea 2 Croatia Netherlands Poland Portugal Vatican 2 Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz 2 3 ULAN People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other RISM SNAC IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rumi&oldid=1191590203" Categories: Rumi 1207 births 1273 deaths Iranian Sunni Muslims Hanafis Maturidis 13th-century Muslim theologians Islamic philosophers Simple living advocates Persian spiritual writers Burials in Turkey Sufi poets 13th-century Persian-language writers Mevlevi Order 13th-century Iranian philosophers Mystic poets People from the Sultanate of Rum 13th-century Persian-language poets 13th-century Islamic religious leaders Iranian Sufi saints People from Balkh Sufi mystics Iranian Muslim mystics Abu Bakr Hidden categories: Articles containing Persian-language text CS1 maint: unfit URL CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with unidentified words Articles with unidentified words from June 2022 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template webcite links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from December 2023 EngvarB from September 2016 Pages using religious biography with multiple nickname parameters Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages with Persian IPA Articles containing Turkish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Open Library links Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with KANTO identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLK identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with PortugalA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with MusicBrainz identifiers Articles with ULAN identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with RISM identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers Articles with TDVİA identifiers This page was last edited on 24 December 2023, at 12:46 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Toggle limited content width